PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, 


QUADRIPARTITE: 


BEING 
FOUR BOOKS 


OF THE 


INFLUENCE OF THE STARS. 





NEWLY TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK PARAPHRASE OF PROCLUS. 


WITH 
A PREFACE, EXPLANATORY NOTES, 


AND 


An Appendix, 


CONTAINING 


EXTRACTS FROM THE ALMAGEST OF PTOLEMY, 
And the whole of his 


CENTILOQUY; 
together with 
A short Notice of Mr. Ranger's Zodiacal Planisphere, 
AND AN EXPLANATORY FPLATE. 


tp -—ee— 
By J. M. ASHMAND. 





“ Ye stars, which are the poetry of Heaven! 
“¢ Tf, in your bright leaves, we would read the fate 
** Of men and empires,—’tis to be forgiven.” 
LORD BYRON. 


es) 
7 
| 
London ; 
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY DAVIS AND DICKSON, 


Dealers in Scientific Books, 
No. 17, St. Martin’s-le-Grand, Newgate Street, 


1822. 


TO THE 


AUTHOR OF “ WAVERLEY,” 
THIS TRANSLATION 


or A 
WORK CONTAINING THE BEST ACCREDITED PRINCIPLES 


Or 


Astrology 


18 DEDICATED} . 
With the most profound admiration of his wnrivalled Talents, 
_ WHIOH COULD ALONE HAVE RESTORED 
INTEREST TO THE SPECULATIONS 4 
oP aw 


ANTIQUATED SCIENCE, 


Advertisement. 


THE use recently made of Astrology in the poetical machinery of certain 
works of genius (which are of the -highest popularity, and above all praise), 
seems to have excited in the world at large a desire to learn something of 
the mysteries of that science which has, in all former ages, if not in these : 
days, more or less engaged reverence and usurped belief. The apparent 
existence of such a general desire has caused the completion of the following 
Translation, and its presentation to the public; although it was originally 
umertaken only in part, and merely to satisfy two or three individuals of the 


on which the now neglected doctrines ef Astrology had so long and 
so fully maintained credit. 


PREARAGR, 
—— 


OF all sciences, whether true or false, which have at 
any time engaged the attention of the world, there is 
not one of which the real or assuined principles are less 
generally known, in the present age, than those of As- 
trology. The whole doctrine of this science is com- 
monly understood to have been completely overturned ; 
and, of late, people seem to have satisfied themselves 
with merely knowing the import of its name. Suchcon- 
tented ignorance, in persons, too, sufficiently informed 
in other respects, is the more extraordinary, since Astro- 
logy has sustained a most conspicuous part throughout 
the history of the world, even until days comparatively 
recent. In the East, where it first arose, at a period of 
very remote antiquity*, and whence it came to subjugate 
the intellect of Europe, it still even now holds sway. in 





* Sir Isaac Newton has the following remarks in regard to the 
origin of Astrology :—* After the study of Astronomy was set on 
“‘ foot for the use of navigation, and the Egyptians, by the heliacal 
“ risings and settings of the stars, had determined the length of the 
“solar year of 365 days, and by other observations had fixed the 
“‘ solstices, and formed the fixed stars into asterisms, all which was 
“ done in the reigns of Ammon, Sesac, Orus, and Memnon,” (about 
1000 years before Christ), “it may be presumed that they continued 
‘“‘ to observe the motions of the planets, for they called them after the 
“ names of their gods; and Nechepsos, or Nicepsos, King of Sais,” 
[772 B.C.] “by the assistance of Petosiris, a priest of Agypt, in- 

a 


vi PREFACE. 

Europe, and in every part of the world where learning 
had “ impress’d the human soil,” Astrology reigned su- 
preme until the middle.of the k7th century. It entered 





“ vented astrology, grounding it upon the aspects of the planets, and 
“the qualities of the mcn and women to whom they were dedi- 
* “ cated*; and in the beginning of the reign of Nabonassar, King of 
“ Babylon, about which time the Zthiopians, under Sabacon, invaded 
“ Egypt,” [751 B. C.] “those Agyptians who fled from him to Ba- 
“ bylon, carried thither the Egyptian year of 365 days, and the study 
“ of astronomy and astrology, and founded the sera of Nabonassar, 
“ dating it from the first year of that king’s reign” [747 B.C.], “and 
“beginning the year on the same day with the Egyptians for the 
“ sake of their calculations. So Diodorus: ‘they say that the Chal- 
“ « dzansin Babylon, being colonies of the Egyptians, became famous 
“ ¢ for astrology, having learned it from the priests of Lgypt.” —New- 
ton’s Chronology, pp. 251, 252. 


Again, in p. 327: “The practice of Shaersing the stars began in . 


“ JEgypt in the days of Ammon, as above, and was propagated from 
“ thence, in the reign of his son Sesac, into Afric, Europe, and Asia, 
“ by conquest; and then Atlas formed the sphere of the Libyans” 
[956 B. C.], “ and Chiron that of the Greeks [939 B. C.]; and the 
“ Chaldzans also made a sphere of their own. But astrology was 
“invented in gypt by Nichepsos, or Necepsos, one of the Kings of 
“the Lower Agypt, and Petosiris his priest, a little before the days 
“ of Sabacon, and propagated thence into Chaldza, where Zoroaster, 
“ the legislator of the Magi, met with it: so Paulinus ; 


“ « Quique magos docuit mysteria vana Necepsos.’” 

The arcana of Astrology constituted a main feature in the doctrines 
of the Persian Magi ; and it further appears, by Newton’s Chronology, 
p. 347, that Zoroaster (although the zra of his life has been erro- 
neously assigned to various remoter periods) lived in the reign of 





* It is maintained by astrologers, that the planets, having been ob- 
served to produce certain effects, were consequently dedicated to the 
several personages whose names they respectively beaf. 


at 


PREFACK. vil 
into the councils of princes, it guided the policy of na- 
tions, and ruled the daily actions of individuals. All 
this is attested by the records of every nation which has 





Darius Hystaspis, sont 520 B. C., and assisted Hystaspes, the father 
of Darius, in reforming the Magi, of whom the said Hystaspes waa 
Master. Newton adds, p. 352, that “about the same time with Hys- 
“ taspes and Zoroaster, lived also Ostanes, another eminent Magus : 
“ Pliny places him under Darius Hystaspis, and Suidas makes him 
“ the follower of Zoroaster: he came into Greece with Xerxes about 
“480 B. C., and seems to be the Otanes of Herodotus. In his book, 
‘‘ called the Octateuchus, he taught the same doctrine of the Daity 
“as Zoroaster.” | 
Having quoted thus far from Newton, it scems proper to subjoin. 
"the following extract from the “ Ancient Universal History :’—‘ In 
“the reign of Gushtasp” [the oriental name of Darius Hystaspis], 
“ King of Persia, flourished a celebrated astrologer, whose name was 
‘‘ Gjamasp, surnamed Al Hakim, or the wise. The most credible 
““ writers say that he was the brother of King Gusbtasp, and his con- 
“ fidant and chief minister. He is said to have predicted the coming 
“* of the Messiah ; and some treatises under his name are yet current 
‘in the East. Dr. Thomas Hyde, in speaking of this philosopher, 
“‘ cites a passage from a very ancient author, having before told us 
“ that this author asserted there had been among the Persians ten 
“‘ doctors of such consummate wisdom as the whole world could not 
“ boast the like. He then gives the author’s words: ‘ Of these, the 
“‘ © sixth was Gjamasp, an astrologer, who was counsellor to Hystas- 
“‘ pis. He is the author of a book intitled Judicia Gjamaspis, in 
“which is contained his judgement on the planetary conjunctions. 
‘“‘‘ And therein he gave notice that Jesus should appear; that Mo- 
“‘*hammed should be born; that the Magian religion should be 
““abolished, &c.; nor did any astrologer ever come up to him.’ 
“[E hb. Mucj. apud Hyde}. Of this book there is an Arabic ver- 
“ sion, the title of which runs thus; The Book of the Philosopher 


“ Gjamasp, containing Judgements on the Grand Conjunctions of the — 


“ Planets, and on the Events produced by them. This version was 
“‘ made by Lali; ‘the title be gave it in Arabic was Al Keranat, and 


- 7 


«oh 
- EERO 
t 


Vili | PREFACE. 

a history, and by none more fully than by those of Eng- 
land. Yet, with these striking facts before their eyes, 
the present generation seem never, until now, to have 





* he published it A. D. 1280. In the preface of his version it is said 
“‘ that, after the times of Zoroaster, or Zerdusht, reigned Gushtasp, 
“the son of Lohrasp*, a very powerful prince; and that in his reigu 
“* flourished in the city of Balch, on the borders of Chorassan, a most 
“excellent philosopher, whose name was Gjamasp, author of this 
“‘ book ; wherein is contained an account of all the great conjunctions 
“ of the planets which had happened before his time, and which were 
“to happen in succeeding ages; and wherein the appearances of 
“now religions and the rise of new monarchies were exactly set 
“down. This author, throughout his whole piece, styles Zerdusht, or 
“ Zoroaster, our Prophet. [D’Herbelot, Bibl. Orient. Art. Gjamasb.]} 
“ The notion of predicting the rise and progress of religions from the 
“¢ grand conjunctions of the planets, has been likewise propagated in 
“‘ our western parts: Cardan was a bold assertor of this doctrine. 
‘The modern Persians are still great votaries of astrology, and al- 
“ though they distinguish between it and astronomy, they have but 
‘one word to express astronomer and astrologer; viz. manegjim, 
“ which is exactly equivalent to the Greek word a¢gsdeyee. Of all the 
‘‘ provinces of Persia, Chorassan is the most famous for producing 
‘‘ great men in that art ; and in Chorassan there is a little town called 
“‘ Genabed, and in that town a certain family which, for 6 or 700 
“‘ years past, has produced the most famous astrologers in Persia ; 
** and the king’s astrologer is always either a native of Genabed, or 
“one brought up there. Sir John Chardin affirms that the appoint- 
“‘ ments in his time for these sages amounted to six millions of French 
“ livres per annum.—Albumazar of Balch (scholar of Alkendi, a Jew, 
‘‘ who was professor of judicial astrology at Bagdad, in the Caliphate 





* This seems to be a mistake of the Arabian author, for Gushtasp 
was identical with Darius Hystaspis, and Lohrasp [otherwise Cy- 
axares] was father of Darius the Mede, who was overcome by Cyrus, 
536 B.C.—Sce Newton. 


PREFACE. ix 
inquired on what basis this belief of their forefathers 


was established, nor by what authority the delusion (if. 


it was one) could have been for so many ages supported. 
Among a-thousand persons who now treat the mention 
of Astrology with supercilious ridicule, there is scarcely 
one who knows distinctly what it is he laughs at, or on 
what plea his ancestors should stand excused for having, 
in their day, contemplated with respect the unfortunate 
object of modern derision. 

The general want of information on these points, and 
the indifference with which such want has been hitherto 


regarded, cannot surely be attributed solely to the mo- 





‘‘ of Almamoum*) became wonderfully famous. He wrote expressly 
‘from the Persian astrologers, and it may be from the works of 
“ Gjamasp, since he also reports a prediction of the coming of Christ 
“in the following words: viz. ‘In the sphere of Persia, saith Aben 


‘* « Ezra, there ariseth upon the face of the sign Virgo a beautiful 


“ * maiden, she holding two ears of corn in her hand, and a child in 
“<< her arm: she feedeth him, and giveth him suck, &c. This maiden,’ 
‘saith Albumazar, ‘we call Adrenedefa, the pure Virgin. She 
“‘ “ bringeth up a child in a place which is called Abrie [the Hebrew 
“* land], and the child’s name is called Eisi [Jesus].’ This made 
“‘ Albertus Magnus believe that our Saviour, Christ, was born in 
‘“‘ Virgo; and therefore Cardinal Alliac, erecting our Lord’s nativity 
“ by his description, casteth this sign into the horoscope. But the 
“ meaning of Albumazar was, saith Friar Bacon, that the said virgin 
“‘ was born, the Sun being in that sign, and so it is noted in the oa- 
“ Jendar; and that she was to bring up her son in the Hebrew land. 
“‘[Mr. John Gregory’s Notes on various Passages of Seiprel 
Ancient Universal History, vol. 5, pp. 415 to 419. 





* This caliph reigned in the earlier part of the 9th centary, and 


caused Ptolemy's Great Construction to be translated into Arabic, as — 


hereafter mentioned. 


x . PREFACK. 


dern disrepute of the science; for mankind have usually, 
in every successive age, exercised great industry in 
tracing all previous customs, however trifling or obso- 
lete, and in examining all sorts of creeds, however un- 
important or erroneous, whenever there has appeared 
any striking connection between such matters and his- 
torical facts; and, since astrology is most unquestion- 
ably blended intimately with history, it therefore be- 
comes necessary to seek for some further hypothesis, by 
which this ignorance and indifference may be accounted 
for. 

Perhaps astrology has been conceived to have borne 
the same relation to astronomy as alchymy did to chy- 
mistry. If such has been the notion, it has certainly been 
adopted in error, for a modern chymist is still almost 
an alchymist: it is true that he no longer delays his 
work in deference to the planets, nor does he now try 
to make’ gold, nor to distil the elixir of earthly immor- 
tality; but nevertheless he still avails himself, to a cer- 
tain degree, of the same rules and the same means as 
those of the old alchymist: he is still intent upon the 
subtle processes of Nature, and still imitates her as far 
as he can. He reduces the diamond to charcoal by an 
operation analogous to that by which the alchymist 
sought to transmute fead into gold; and he mainly dif- 
fers from the alchymist only in having assured himself 
that there is a point beyond which Nature forbids fac- 
similes. Not so slightly, however, does the astronomer 
differ from the astrologer, but toto celo: the astrologer 
considered the heavenly bodies and their motions merely 
as the mechanism wherewith he was to weave the tissue 
of his predictions; and astronomy is no more an inte- 
gral part of astrology, than the loom is of the web which 


PREFACE. xi 


has beer woven by it. To have an idea of what alchy- 
my was, it is sufficient to have an idea of chymistry; but 
astronomy, in itself, will never give a notion of astro- 
logy, which requirea additional and distinct considera- 
tion. 

It may be urged, that in the present day a general idea 
of this by-gone and disused science is quite sufficient 
for every body not professedly antiquarian. Such an- 
asaertion would doubtless never be controverted, pro-. 
vided the proposed general idea might comprehend the 
truth. But the present actual general idea of astrology 
is by no means so comprehensive; indeed, nothing can 
well be. more inaccurate, or even more false: it seems to 
have been adopted not from the elements of the science 
itself, but from trite observations made by writers against 
the science; and. consequently the werld now wonders 
at the lamentable defect of understanding that could 
ever have permitted belief in it—forgetting that astrology 
has been consigned to neglect, not in consequence of 

any prima facie palpability in its imputed fallacies, nor 
- Indeed of any special skill or acuteness on the part of 
its professed adversaries, but rather in consequence of 
the sudden and astonishing growth of other undoubted 
sciences, with which it has been presumed to be incom- 
patible, and which during the thousands of yeara of the 


reign of astrology were either unborn; or still slumbering 
in continued infancy*. 





* To this view of the case, the following remarks seem not inap- 
plicable: they are taken from a periodical work of deserved repu- 
tation:— — 

“Phe study of astrology itself, as professing to discover, by celes- 
“ tial phenomena, future mutations in the elements and terrestrial 


xii | PREFACE. 


] 


The words “ professed adversaries,” which have just 
now been used, are of course not intended to be. applied 
to those mighty explorers of Nature’s laws and man’s 
powers, who, in their lofty career, may have made an 
incidental swoop at the pretensions of astrology. Di- 
rectly engaged in more exact pursuits, they stopped not 
to dissect this their casual prey, which, after having been 
thus struck by eagles, was left to regale crows and daws, 
and these, in their convivial loquacity, accused their 
unfortunate victim of crimes incapable of being com- 
mitted, and of offences which had never been imagined. 
Of the real faults of their victim these garrulous bipeds 
seem not to have been aware, or, if aware, they seem to 
have considered them as not sufficiently prominent. Nor 
was this want of candour or information absolutely con- 
fined to the mere vulgar herd of vituperative scribblers, 
for even the sparkling essay against astrology, written by - 





‘‘ bodies, ought, perhaps, not to be despised*. The theory of the tides, 
* for example, is altogether an astrological doctrine, and, long before 
“ the days of Sir Isaac Newton, was as well understood as it is at this 
“moment. The correspondence alleged by the ancient physicians 
“to exist between the positions of the Moon and the stages of various 
‘‘ diseases, is so far from being rejected by the modern faculty, that 
“ it has been openly maintainedt}.” The writer then recounts sundry 
incidents, asserted by the astrologers to be dependent on the Moon, 
and he adds these words: “The fact of these allegations might be so 
‘easily ascertained, that it is surprising they should still be pro- 
‘¢ nounced incredible, and denied rather than contradicted.” 





‘‘e Sir Christopher Heydon’s Defence of Astrology, p. 2, edit. 1603.” 

‘+ Dr, Mead on the Influence of the Sun and Moon upon Human 
‘Bodies. See also Edinb. Rev. vol. 12, p. 36—Balfour on Sol-Lanar 
“Influence.” Blachwood’s Magazine for Dec. 18%1, Part 2, No. 59. 


PREFACE. xii 


Voltaire (in his.irrepressible desire to convince the world 
that he was au fait.in every thing), proves only that the 
writer, though the most generally informed man of his 
time, had mistaken the really assailable points of the 
object of his attack. 

The author of the present Translation has No intention | 
now of either advocating or impugning the doctrines of 
the science of which his Translation discourses: his 
purpose is a different one. He has that sort of respect 
for ‘‘the dead, which are already dead,” which, although 
it does not incline him to “praise” them “ more than 
“ the living, which are yet alive,” is still sufficient to 
incite him to endeavour to avert the imputation of idiot 
credulity, to which their faith in astrology seems now 
to subject them in the general opinion of the enlightened 
‘‘ living.” And, while he disclaims all idea of presum- 
_ing to offer any argument on either side of the question, 
as to the validity of the science, he must still, at the 
same time, confess his admiration of the ingenuity and 
contrivance manifest in its construction, and avow his 
readiness to believe’ that all its harmonized complica- 
tions might have easily held dominion over some of the 
strongest minds in that darker period when it flourished. 

_ In executing here the desire of attempting to vindi- 
cate the ancient credence in astrology, an elaborate dis- 
quisition would surely be not only unnecessary, but mis- 
placed: it seems sufficient to refer the reader to the 
work of which the following is a translation, and. to 
these undisputed facts,—that the science was formerly 
inculcated by the highest and most erudite authorities 
of the period,—that it was insisted on by votaries in all 
parts of the world, attesting and producing instances of . 
its truth ;—and, moreover, that it was so finely and beau- 

b 


xiv _- PREFACE. 


tifully put together, as to cause the only deficiency of 
one small, though most important, link in its whole 
_ chain of argument, to be undetected by dull minds, and 
readily supplied by enthusiastic genius. For centuries 
after centuries all branches of learning were either made 
subservient to astrology, or carried on in close alliarice 
with it; and many of the illustrious names which it re- 
calls to our recollection are gratefully reverenced even. 
by modern science. The genius of Roger Bacon, al- 
though he was the first of that school of natural phi- 
losophy which acknowledges none but experimented 
truths, was nevertheless bowed to the doctrines of ju- 
dicial astrology; and his greater Namesake, who after 
an interval of several centuries succeeded to him in giv- 
ing proper direction to the mental energy, was still an 
arguer in favour of celestial influences: it may be, there- 
fore, fairly inferred, that the subtle spell which had 
strength to enthrall “stuff” so “stern,” could have been 
of no weak or vulgar order, but that it was sufficiently 
potent and refined to interest and amuse even the pre- 
sent age*. | 





* In the 51st No. of the Giarnay Review, Art. “ Astrology and 
“ Alchymy,” the following observations are made :— 

“ Certainly, if man may ever found his glory on the achievements 
of his wisdom, he may reasonably exultin the discoveries of astro- 
‘‘ nomy ; but the knowledge which avails us has been created solely 
‘‘ by the absurdities which it has extirpated. Delusion became the 
‘* basis of truth. Horoscopes and nativities have taught us to trace 
* the planet in its sure and silent path; and the acquirements which, 
“ of all others, now testify the might of the human intellect, derived 
“‘ their origin from weakness and credulity” (p. 181). Again; “ As- 
“ trology, like alchymy, derives no protection from sober reason ; yet, 
4 with all its vanity and idleness, it was not a corrupting weakness. 


; 


» Jn this little volume will be found the. whole: of the 
elements of astrology, and the entire ground-work of 
those stupendous tomes in folio and quarto on the same - 
subject, which were produced in myriads during the 
16th and 17th centuries, for the due mystification of the 
then world. The present volume is addressed equally 
to the general reader, as well as to the votary of pure 
astrology, if any such there be: to the one it offers 
amusement; for the other, it should contain the mest 
glowing interest. Even to the speculative metaphysi- 
cian it will furnish food for contemplation ; for, in ad- | 
dition to its peculiar hypothesis of cause and effect, 
it developes many of those apparent incongruities of 
character so often united in the same individual: and 
this developement, even although adapted to the doc- . 
trine of the stars, still merits attention; inasmuch ag 
the phenomena of which it treats (in whatever way 
they may be produced or regulated) will ever remain 
in actual existence. 
_ ‘The only English translation of Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos ; 
hitherto published, appears to have been first set forth 





“Tokens, predictions, prognostics, possess a psychological reality. 
“ All events are but the consummation of preceding causes, clearly 
- felt, but not distinctly apprehended. When the strain is sounded, 
« the most untutored listener can tell that it will end with the key- 
“ note, though he cannot explain why each successive bar.must at 
“ last lead to the concluding chord. The omen embodies the pre-— 
“ sentiment, and receives its consistency from our hopes or fears.” 
pe 208. 

It may, perhaps, be difficult to assent to all of the propositions in- 
volved in these extracts; but there are among them some which are 
' clearly unquestionable. 


xvi PREFACE. 

in 1701, under the name of “The Quadripartite.” That 
publication has been long removed from general sale; 
and its gross mis-interpretation of the author, caused by 
the carelessness or ignorance of Whalley and his assist- 
ants, by whom it was produced, has rendered most of 
its pages unintelligible: its absence is, therefore, scarce- 
ly to be regretted. The second edition of the same 
translation, professing to be “ revised, corrected, and 
“improved,” and published by Browne and Sibley, in 
1786, was not, in any one instance, purified from the 
blunders and obscurities which disgraced its predecessor: 
it seems, in fact, less excusable than the former edition, 
of which it was merely a reprint, without being. at all 
corrected, not even in certain typographical errata 
which the former printer had been zealous enough to 
point out in his final page. Even this second publica- 
tion, worthless as it intrinsically is, can rarely now be 
‘met with, and, like the former, only at a very heavy 


“price. — 


. ‘The present Translation has been made from Proclus’ 8 
Greek Paraphrase of Ptolemy’s original text: the edi- 
tion followed is that of the Elzevirs, dated in 1635*. 





' © This edition was printed i in double eohuiau one containing Pro- 
clus’s Greek Paraphrase, the other the Latin translation of Leo 
Allatius; and William Lilly (no light authority in these matters) thus 
wrote of it in the year 1647: “ Indeed Ptolemy hath been printed in 
“ folio, in quarto, in octavo, in sixteens: that lately printed at Ley- 
“den” [where the Elzevirs were establistred] “I conceive to be 
‘most exact; it was performed by Allatius.” To the said edition is 
prefixed an anonymous address to the reader, in Latin, and to the 
following effect :— 

“I have reckoned it part of my duty to give you, benevolent 
“ reader, some short information as to the publication of this little 


PREFACE. XVil 


But, in the course of translation, continual references . 
have been also had to various editions of the original 


text, in order to ascertain the proper acceptation of 





“‘ work, which, having hitherto existed only in Greek*, is now, in its 
Latin dress, accessible to the curiosity of all persons. This Para- 
‘* phrase of Proclus on the Tetrabiblos of Ptolemy was translated a 
“ few years ago by Leo Allatius, a Greek by birth, eminently skilled 
“ in the learning of his own nation, as well as in Latin literature, 
‘‘ and already celebrated for other writings in both languages. He 
“ lives, I have understood, in Rome, in the family of Cardinal Biscia, 
‘‘ and holds some office in the Vatican Library. He undertook this 
“* present work, however, for his own private gratification, and that 
“of certain friends; but when writings compiled with this view 
‘‘ have once quitted their author's hands, it will often happen that 
“ they have also, at the same time, escaped his controul. So this 
“ offspring of Allatius, having emerged from Rome, arrived at Ve- 
- “nice, from whence it was forwarded to me by a certain great per- 
_ “ sonage of illustrious rank, in order that I might cause it to be 
‘printed. The names of Ptolemy and Proclus, so celebrated among 
“mathematicians and philosophers, besides the subject of the work 
“ itself, seemed to me a sufficient warrant for committing it to the 
“press. Whereupon] delayed not to avail myself of the advantages 
« J possessed in having access to our excellent and most accurate 
‘‘ typographers, the Elzevirs, and I ¢arnestly solicited them to pub- 
“ lish it: they, in their love for the commonwealth of letters, took 
“upon themselves the charge of printing it in the-form you see. 
“ You will learn from it, inquisitive Reader, how much power the 
“stars have over the atmosphere and all sublunary things : for the 


% 


® This assertion is applicable only to Proclus’s Paraphrase. There 
were s¢veral prior translations of the original Tetrabiblos in Latin 
and Arabic; and it appears by an extract from thé Bibliotheca 
. Greeca of Fabricius [which will be found in a subsequent page], that 
a Latin version, done from the Arabic, was printed at Venice as 
early as the year 1493. : 


“xviii _ PREFACE. 

doubtful passages. The editions thus inspected were 
that by Camerarius, printed at Nuremberg in 1535; 
. that by Melancthon, printed at Basle in 1553; and that 





“ stars, and those brighter bodies of heaven, must not be imagined 
“to be idle. The whole doctrine of the stars is not, however, here 
“ treated of, but enly that distinct part of it which the Greeks call | 
“ judicial and prognostic, and which, while confined within certain 
“ limits, is as entertaining as it is useful; and is partly considered to 
“ be agreeable to nature. But should it pretend to subject to the skies 
“‘ such things as do not depend thereupon, and should it invite us to 
“‘ foresee by the stars such things as are above the weakness of our 
“‘ apprehension, it will assuredly deserve to be reprehended as.a vain 
‘and empty art, which has been demonstrated in many learned 
“ books by the great Picus of Mirandola. The Chaidteans, Geneth- 
“ liaos, and Planetarians, have been always held in disrepute, because 
“they professed to know not only more than they actually did know, - 
“ but also more than is allowed to man to know. Even Ptolemy, 
_ “ while he employs himself in this present work upon the Doctrine of 
“ Nativities, is scarcely free from the charge of superstition and va- 
_“‘ nity: perhaps, in a Pagan, this may be forgiven; but it is hardly 
“to be tolerated, that persons professing Christianity should be led 
““away by such an empty study, in which there is no solid utility, 
“ and the whole pleasure of which is puerile. Finally, I warn you 
“that some persons doubt whether this was really produced by 
‘‘ Ptolemy®: nevertheless, it has certainly appeared to Porphyry and 
“ Proclus (who were doubtless great philosophers, although hostile 
“ to the Christian faith) to be worthy of receiving elucidation by their 
“Commentaries upon itt. Peruse it, however, friendly reader, with - 
“ caution, having first shaken off the weakness of credulity, for the 
“‘ sinew of wisdom is not te believe rashly. Farewell.” 

In addition to the remarks made in the foregoing address regard- 





. * The reader is again referred to the extract from Fabricius (insert- 
ed in a snbsequent page), contajning that learned person's account of 
this book among the other works of Ptolemy. 

+ Their Commentaries were printed at Basle, in 1559. 


N 


PREFACE. xix 


by. acta printed, with his own ehormous commen- 
‘tries, at Lyons, in 1581. Independently of ‘these re- 
ferences, the presenf translation has been collated with 
the Latin of Leo Allatius, and with two other Latin 
translations: one printed at Basle, together with a tran- 
slation of the .Almagest in 1541; the other by itself at 
Perugio, in 1646*. The Translator has devoted all this 
‘extreme‘cdre and attention to his labours, in the wish to 
render Ptolemy’s astro-judicial doctrine into English as 
‘purely and perfectly as possible; and, with the same 
‘view, he:has likewise added, in an Appendix, certain 
‘extracts from such parts of the Almagest as were found 
to’ be referred to in'the present work. Further illustra- 
tion'is also given by notes gathered from the “‘Primum 
"© Mobile” of Placidust, and from a variety of other 





ing Leo Allatius, it may be shaerved that he was appointed Keeper 
of the Vatican Library by Pope Alexander VII, with whom he was 
in: high favour. Itis said of him, that he hada pen with which he 
had written Greek for forty: years, and that he shed tears on losing it. 
Another story of him states, that the Pope. bad often urged him to 
take holy orders, that he might be advanced in the church, and one 
day asked him why he had not done so: “ Because,” said ee 
‘I would be free to marry.”—“ Why, then, do you not marry %” 

“ Because I would be free to take orders.’ ’— Chalmers’s Biographical 
Dictionary. 

'* This transtation from the Perugio press has been serviceable: in 
presenting certain various readings; but it does not seem to podiléss 
any other peculiar merit. It professes to be a translation fromthe 
original text of Ptolemy; and so likewise does the translation printed 
at Basle, as above quoted. ~ 


t It appears by the printed works of this author, that co was named 
Didacus Placidus de Titis. He wasa native of Bologna; by pro- 
fession 2 monk,.and was styled Mathematician to the Archdake E.eo- 


oe 


xx _- PREFACE. 
sources whence any elucidation of the text might be 


derived. Even Whalley’s “ Annotations” (to use his 


own grandiloquent designation) have occasionally yield- 
ed information, not altogether unimportant, although 
generally incomplete. 

It seems improper to close this Preface (notwithstand- 
ing the bulk it has already attained), without annexing 
the following short notice of the life and works of the 


' great man from whom the Tetrabiblos has emanated. 


Claudius Ptolemy was born at Pelusium, in Agypt, 
and became an illustrious disciple of the school of 
Alexandria, in which city he flourished during the reign 
of Adrian and that of Antoninus Pius. The date of his 
birth has been commonly assigned to the 70th year of 
the Christian zra; but the accuracy of this date seems 
questionable ; for he has himself noted in one part of hig 
works, that Antoninus reigned twenty-three years. He 
must have, therefore, survived that prince; and, as it is 
not probable that he continued his scientific labours 
until after ninety years of age, which he must have done 
had he been born about the year 70, because Antoninus © 
died in the year 161, it seems that his birth would be 
more properly ascribed to some later period. Moreover, 
it is asserted by the Arabians, that he died in the 78th 
year of his age; and a similar statement is also made 
by Luca Gauricus, in the dedication of his version of 
the Almagest* tu Dominico Palavicini: Gauricus has, 


. -gG__—_--—--—— Pen nae 


pold William of Austria. He wrote in the earlier part of the 17th 
century, and his work, now cited, is considered to contain the most 
successful application of Ptolemy’s astrological rules to practice.. The 
original is cxtremely scarce; but a new English ee: by Cooper, 
may be had of the Publishers of this work. 

* Printed at Basle, 1541. 


BERBAER. xxi 
‘bowever, plated his-debth in ‘the ‘year 147, which does 
nét accord with the fact of his liaving survived Anty- 
 ninus. 

‘Pigléimy hds récdtded tint he observed, at Alexan- 
atfa, ‘an eclipse of the Moon, in the $th year of Adrian ; . 
awd that he iidde many observations upon the fixed 
M6xs in tie Qd year of Antoninus Pius: whence it may 
bé condladéd, that his observations upon the heavens 
Wére principally made during the period from A.D. 125 - 
to A.D. 140, or thereabouts; ‘and it also follows, of 
course, that thé supposition, eutértained by some au- 

thors, of liis fdentity with the Ptolemy who was always 
in attendance updén Galba, as his personal astrologer, 
atid who promiséd Otho that lie should survive Nero 
dnd obtain the empire, is entirély without foundation®. 
To Gauricus’s version of the Almagest there is algo 
anothet dedication, addressed to Pope Sixtus, and com- 


posed by Georgé Tiapezuntius, describing Ptolémy as 


“ vegid stirpe oriindum,” and explaining that he had, 
“with a truly regal mind,” applied himself to the 
sciences, because the ancient Sceptre of the Ptolemies 
had previously passed into the hands of Cleopatra, and 
hectuse the kingdom of Aigypt had been since reduced 
to the state of a Roman provincé. The authentic de- 
tdils of the circumstances of Ptolemy’ 8 life are, however, 
extreniély few. It is said that he was distinguished 
ditiong the Greeks by the epithets “‘ most wise,” and 
“ most divine,” on account of his great learning ; and, 
according to thé Preface to Whalléy’s translation of thé 
Tettabiblos, the Arabians report that “he was extreme- 





* Chalmers’s Biographical Dictionary. 
Bs 


-Xxil PREFACE. 


“ly abstemious, and rode much on horseback ; adding, 
that although he .was “ spruce in apparel,” yet his 
breath was not remarkable for an agreeable odour. 

The errors of the Ptolemaic theory of the universe 
have now been long discarded; but there are many 
points in which modern sciences, and modern astrono- 
my in particular, have reaped incalculable benefits from 
thé labours and researches of its great founder. He 
has preserved and transmitted to us the observations 
and principal discoveries of remoter periods, and has — 
enriched aud augmented them with his own. He cor- 
rected Hipparchus’s catalogue of the fixed stars, and 
formed tables for the calculation and regulation of the 
motions of the Sun, Moon, and planets. He was, in 
fact, the first who collected the scattered and detached 
observations of Aristotle, Hipparchus, Posidonius, and 
others on the ceconomy of the world, and digested them 
into a system, which he set forth in his Meyzay Duvragic, 
- or Great Construction, divided into thirteen books, and 
called, after him, the Ptolemaic System. This and all 
his other astronomical works are founded upon the hy- 
pothesis, that the earth -is at rest in- the centre of the 
universe, and that the heavenly ‘bodies; stars, and pla- 
nets, all move round it in solid orbs, whose motions are 
all directed by one primum mobile, or first mover, of 
which he discourses at large in the ‘“ Great Construc- 
“tion.” In that work he also treats of the figure and 
divisions of the earth, of the right and oblique ascensions 
of the heavenly bodies, and of the motions of the Sun, 
Moon, and planets ; and he gives tables for finding their 
situations, latitudes, longitudes, and motions: he treats 
also of eclipses, and the methods of computing them ; 
and he discourses of the fixed .stars, of which he fur- 


PREFACE. xxiii 
nishes a numerous catalogue, with their magnitudes, la- 
titudes, and longitudes*. | 

It has been truly said, that “ Ptolemy’s order, false. 
“as it was, enabled observers to give a plausible ac- 
‘ count of the motions of the Sun and Moon, to foretell 
“ eclipses, and to improve geographyt+;” or, in other 
words, that it represented the actual phenomena of the 
heavens as they really appear to a spectator on the 
earth. It is, therefore, clear that Ptolemy’s astrology is 
just as applicable to modern and improved esronomy 
as it was to his ownt. 





* In France, about the beginning of the 16th century, Oronce Finé, 
the Royal Reader, attempted, under the patronage of Francis I, to 
produce an astronomical clock, in which every thing moved accord- © 
ing to the principles of Ptolemy. It was kept, about fifty years ago, 
in the monastery of St. Geneviéve, at-Paris. In Lilly’s Catalogue of 

_Astrological Authors, Orontius Finzus is mentioned as the writer of 
a work on the twelve houses of heaven, printed in Paris, 1553. 

t Spectacle de la Nature. 

{ The objection which has been arged against astrology, that the — 
signs are continually moving from their positions, cannot invalidate 
this conclusion. That objection has, -in fact, no real existence ; for 
Ptolemy seems to have been aware of this motion of the signs, and 
has fully provided for it in the 25th Chapter of the 1st Book of the 
Tetrabiblos. From that’ chapter it is clear that the respective in- 
fluences he ascribes to the twelve signs (or divisions of the zodiac) 
were considered by him as appurtenant to the places they occupied, 
and not to the stars of which they were composed. He has expressly 
and repeatedly declared that the point of the vernal equinox is ever 
the beginning of the zodiac, and that the 30 degrees following it ever | 
retain the same virtue as that which he has in this work attributed 
to Aries, although the stars furming Aries may have quitted those 
degrees: the next 80 degrees are still to be accounted as Taurus, 
and so of the rest. There is abundant proof throughout the Tetrabi- 

blos, that Ptolemy considered the virtues of the constellations of the 
sodiat distinctly from those of the spaces they‘occupied. 


xxiy, | PREFACE,, 

‘Tn the year 827? the .“ Great Construction” was Stabs. 
slated by the ‘Arabians into ‘their own language, and:.by., 
them communicated to Europe. It is through them,that 
it has been usually known by the name. of the Almagest. 
In the 13th century, the Emperor Frederic. II caused it. 
to be translated from the Arabic into Latin, and Sacro- 
bosco+ was "consequently enabled to write his famous, 
work upon the sphere. It wasnot, however, until abont, 
the end of the 15th century that, the as Great, Construc;. 
“ tion” was translated into Latin from the original, text; 
and this important service was rendered to science by, 
Purbach, a professor of philosophy at Vienna, “who 
learned the Greek tongue at the instigation of Cardinal _ 
Bessarion. By means of this translation, the Epheme-. 
rides ‘of George Miller, surnamed Regiomontanus, a — 
‘disciple of Purbach’s, were first composed. The Greek | 
text of the Almagest, or Great Construction, was first, 
| published. ‘at Basle, by Simon Gryneus, 3 in 1598;. and. it . 
was again ‘printed at the same place in. L551, with. cer 
tain other works of Ptolemy{.. The rest of Ptelemy’s 
works connected with astronomy, and now extant, are 
_ the Tetrabiblos, or Four Books of the Influence of the. 
States (now tranglated) ; ; the Protloany. or Fruit, of his Ban 





° The French 1 say’813, but 827 is the date giyen py, English chro... 
; nologists. - 

¢ This, scientific, man was a Mathurine Prigy and § a proteagor i in the 
University. of Paris: he died i in 1256. Iti is pointed o out in the Edin. , 
burgh Review, No. 68 that he was ‘a native of Yorkshire,. and. bis... 
real name John ‘Holywood, euphonized, in Paris, into,Sacroboseo, | | 

t Chalmers.—The’ Tetrabiblos Was, 8 ame ng; these ‘works, 

§ To such readers as may he curieus. to know in what mapner this. 


book was promilgijed in Europe, a after the revival, of Jettars, the folr. 


‘PREPAC. waxy? 


Four, Books, being,.a-kind: of. supplement to: ‘ea eens =< 
and. the Significations of. the:Fixed! Stars: Tlie last.is! 
merely, a, daily calendar; shewing the risingacand settingsv- 


lowing extract-from the Bibfiotheca Greeca of Fabricius will furnish 
information :— 
“ Libe JV.-Cap, SEVIG4. wiser schns tian QMiedri- 

“ pertitum, sive quatuar libri de anotel.smatibus et: jyrlidiis axtrorarm, ab 
“ Syrum (h). Greece primum editi a_Joachimo Camerarie, cum-ver-- 
“‘ sione sua. daorum: priorum.jibroram, et :preécipuorum ¢ retiquis lo- 
“ corgm,; Norimb, 1536, 4te.x—Hine eum versione Phil. Melancthont¢; 

, “* qui in prafat..ad Erasmum Ebneram.Senatorem Nobrichbergunsent 
_ © testatur se.editionem ,Camerani.muliis mendia purgasse;.tum(nu- 
“* meros.in Jocis. anbaticis tam doseeci-quam.Letini textus emendwnser 
“« Basil, 155%, Sv0.—rLattnecpridem verterat-Aipidens Tebabiinns, ‘sive 
‘« latino-barbaré ex Hispanica versione, Alfoasi Castel Régis-jusse; 
“ ex Arahico (i) confecté,: Vertit et Antonina Gogava;, Lovan. 1548, 
“‘ 4tes.Patayii, 1658, 12m05 Pragse, 1616, 19mo.. Commentario il? 
“ lustvavit: Hheron. Cardanus. prioribus duobas libris Camerarii; posté- 
“‘ rioribuls,: Gogaver:-versione ‘servatd, Basil; 1554,+fol.; 1579% fol. ; 
“* Lugd..1556,.8ve, et m Cardani.opp.—Georgii Vallé-commentarius; 
“ anno..1502 editus,: nihilaliud- est, quamr‘Latina versio scholidruni 
“‘ Grecorun, sive, exegesees jejunse ~Démophili: in tetrabiblon, quae 
“cum Porphyrii:sixve Antiooht-isagoge,. Greece et Latine; addits': 
“‘ Hieron. Wolfii versione, lucem vidit Basil 1559;'fol.” In‘his scho- 
“ liis Dogotheus allegatur,:p. 49,-110, et 439 ;“ Cleopatra; p.'88';' Pdr- 
‘‘ phyrias Philosophus, p. 169.: Meminit et auetor Petosiridis'ac Ne: ° 
. “* copa, p. 118 :—rsyes 3s wadaiep reeNexete (ita leg. pro yeferut p.’1 12)" 
“* gn Diblocignsuveryne eget ce Uacpedeying afetdaven-wpoyvecme®:' Pit” 
“ rapbrasin tetrabibli a, Mrecla concinnatar Gracoe edidit Mélancthin,” 
‘* Basil. 1554, Bva-:, Grane et Latine:cum)-versione'suh Zed Allativs'” 
“« Lug: Batawo16544, 8vo.:; Leegus Ptolemsi:e codtee Greco MS. 


* =<“ Nechepsos and Petosiris are anciently” spoken of, for they , 
‘« first explained prognostication by Astrology.” 

+ This was perhaps a reprint of the edition of 1635, ae whick 
the present translation has been made ; unless there may have been.. 
an error of the press in stating 1654 instead .of 1635, which seems.. 
probable, as the edition of 1635 is unnoticed by. Fabricius. 


; 


‘ 


XXVi | PREFACE. - 


. of the stars, and the nature of the weather thereby pro- .. 
duced. There are likewise extant his’ geographical . 
work (which has rendered important service to modern 
geographers), and also his celebrated book on Har- 
monics, or the Theory of Sound. 

Proclus, to whom the world is indebted for the im- 
proved text of the Tetrabiblos*, was born at Constanti- 





‘‘in collegio Corporis Christi Oxon. feliciter restituit Seldenus, p. 
“85 ad Marmora Arundeliana. Haly Heben Rodoan Arabis com- 
“ mentarium laudat Cardanus, cum Demophilo Latine editum.” 

“‘ (h) Schol. Graec. Mgerqure: re Xuge o Mrorspasoe re AiCasov, woos ov xas 
“6 wag adAacauTe Tacag Weaypsaresae neecepavacer, Atyoue's de viv8g we Kie~ 
** }agas auTo Te Te Tuge ovepsa. Addo Oe ors & wEwAacast, aAr’ sal eog ny wre 
© ay base xa Sa tourer rer padnuaren**.’’ 

“ (i) Selden. Uxor Hebr. p. 342. Gxtcran de Alphonsi Regis 
“ cur§ in promovenda, Arabica Quadripartiti versione, vide, si placet, — 
“Nic: Antonium in Bibl, veteri Hispana, t. 2, p. 55. vel Acta Erad. 
“ A. 1697, p. 302. Latina versio ex Arabico facta lucem vidit Venet. 
“1498, fol... Viderit porro Gassendus, qui in Philosophia Epicuri, — 
. “ubi contra Astrologos disputat. t. 2, p. 501, contendit tetrabiblon _ 
‘“‘ indignum esse Ptolemei genio et subdititium. Equidem Jo. Pico 
“« judice, 1. 1, contra Astrologos, p. 286, Ptolemeus malorum sive 
“A potelesmaticoram est optimus.” 

* It will be seen by the preceding note, that Proclus’s Puraphrads 
of the Tetrabiblos should properly be considered as superior to the 
other readings. of that book ; since it appears, on the authority of © 
Fabricius, that Melancthon, after having been at the pains of cor- | 
recting and republishing, in 1553 (with his own emendations); the- ‘ 
edition of Camerarius, containing the reputed original text, stHt © 
deemed it advisable, in the following year, to edite Proolus’s Para-. 
phrase. This Paraphrase must, therefore, nevessarily have had claims. _ 
to his attention not found in the text he had previously edited. 





** “* Ptolemy addresses the book to Syrus, to whom he has also 
“ addressed all his other treatises. Some say that this name of Syrus 
“‘ was feigned; others, that it was not feigned, but that he was a 
“ physician, and educated in these sciences.” 


st pReRacR, xxvii 
‘Sea in the year 410. He studied at Alexandria and 
‘at Athens, and. became very eminent among the later 
Platonists. He succeeded Syrianus, a celebrated phi-— 
losopher, in the rectorship of the Platonic school at 
Athens, and died there in 485*. He was a most volu- 
minous author, in poetry as well as in prose. Among 
his works there are Hymns to the Sun, to Venus, and 
to the Muses; Commentaries upon several pieces of 
‘Plato, and upon Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos}+; an Epitome 
or Compendium of all the Astronomical Precepts de- 
monstratéd in the Almagest; and Elements of Theology 
-and Natural Philosophy.—He was in dispute with the 
Christians on the question of the eternity of the world, 
which he undertook to prove in eighteen elaborate ar- 
-guments.—A late writer in a certain periodical work 
has erroneously identified him with another Proclas, 
who was in favour with the Emperor Anastasius, and 
who destroyed the ships of Vitalianus, when besieging 
Constantinople in 514, by burning them. with narent bra- 
zen or: or dana 





* Chalmers’s Biographical Dictionary. | 
‘t It will, of course, be understood that this Commentary i is distinot 
from his Paraphrase, now translated. 
\ 





— of the Zodiac. 


¥ Aries & Libra 

3° Taurus m, Scorpio 

um Gemini ff Sagittarius 
gs Cancer vp Capricorn 
Q Leo oo Aquarius. 
m Virgo  -€ Pisées. 


ee ee eee _ = 


Just published, Ly Davis & Dickson, St. Martin's-le- Grand, London. 


1. A NEW METHOD of SOLVING EQUATIONS with Ease and Ex- 
ppedition, by-which the true Value of the Unkatten Quantity is fousid ‘With- 
out previous Reduction; with a Supplement, containing two other Methods 
wf Solving Equations, derived from the sanre Pritrciple. By Tikorniitfs 
HotpraeD. 4to, price 7s. 

2. A TREATISE on INVOLUTION and EVOLUTION, being a new 
‘Method of Extracting the Roots of Equations and Numbers, by Arithmetieal 
“Rules ; with Historical Facts relating to the Invention. By P. NicHonsow. 
810, price 6s. 

N.B.—This Work has been honoured by the approbation ef the Natidnel 
Lastitate of France. : 

3. ANALYTICAL and ARITHMETICAL ESSAYS ; consisting of— 
Continued Fractions—Figurate Numbers=san entire new Method of the Trans- 
formation ef Equations, Determination of their Limits, the Extraction df 
their Roats, and their consequent Depression, by an easier Method than thét 
hitherto practised ; together with the Decomposition of Quantities into others 
ofa given Form. The whole of the Rules resulting from the Theory bey 
such, that the Operations performed by them are completely divested of 


_ tke algebraic form, and themsby rendered purely erithmetical: to’ which ate 


also added, Essays on the Method of Finite Differences—-Indeterminate Equa- 
tions-—and the Combinatorial Analysis; the method of treating the whole of 
these subjects being either new, or rendered more obvious by a clearer eXfila- 
mation. By P. Nicwo.gon, Author of several Analytical Works. S8vo, 12s. 

4 The RUDIMENTS of ALGEBRA; in which the Subjects are expli- 
citly treated in a new Manner, the Theory rendered clear, and the Practiee 
more expeditious than hitherto. For the use of Schools, and the assistancé 
of those who have not had the advantage of a -master; as also to prepare tisé 
student to read the higher branches of the mathematics with less difficulty. 
Ry. Niguonson. 12mo, price 7s. 6d. 

5. A TREATISE on ALGEBRA, containing the Fundamenta! Principles 
of this. Art,and a variety of Problems in the most impottant Branches of the 
Mathematics ; also New Rules for finding the Roots of Equations, anti ‘fod- 
Getermining the Lengths of Curved Lines, &c. By German Buxton. Price 
10s, 8vo, boards. 

6. The ELEMENTS of FLUXIONS. By Joun Dawss, Member of the 
Royal College of Surgeons, in London. Price 3s. 6d. with a Plate. 





Preparing for the Press, by the Publishers of this Translation, 
A short TREATISE on Mr. RANGER’s ZODIACAL PLA- 


‘NISPHERE, descriptive of its various Uses in Astronomy and: Astrology, par< 


ticularly for erecting Figures of Nativities, and for ascertaining the Arcs of Di- 
rection, &c. ; illustrated by an engraved Plate of a Nativity, drawn according to 
the Planisphere, exhibiting all the Heavenly Bodies in their actual Situations 
at the Time of Birth (as indicated by their Declinations and Circles of Posi- 
tion) ; shewing also their several Aspects and Directions properly displayed 
and measured. Other Plates will likewise be annexed, representing the In- 
struments and Scales for correctly laying down this Planisphere, the whole 
use and application of which will be fully detailed in the Treatise.— 
Vide Note, p. 146 of this book. 

An extensive Collection of ancient and modern Alchemical, Architectural, 
Astrological, Astronomical, Botanical, Chemical, Mathematical, Mechanical, _ 
Medical, Military, Nautical, Occult, Philosophical, Surgical, general Scientific 
and miscellaneous Books, in various Languages, both foreign and domestic, 
are on Sale for Ready Money. — 

N.B. Authors’ Manuscripts accurately and neatly printed ; likewise pub- 
lished at a very moderate commission. : 

(<P Plain and ornamental Engraving executed. 


a 


a 


Table of Contents. 


be 


. ss manip 
; . BOOKL. fe 
CHAP. . vo mae 
i. Preem 
. IL Knowledge may be nga by Astronomy ton gartain Extent 3 
ait That Prescience is usefu * - * ll 
-: IV. The Influences of the Planetary ( Orbs - .. . 19 
V. Benefics and Malefics - - - - 21 
“VI. Masculine and Feminine - - « - . tbid. 
. WIL Diurnal and Nocturnal - ~ - - : 22 
- WILL. The Influence of Position with regard to the Sun - -B 
IX. The Influence of the fixed Stars ? 7, ‘- 24 
- X. Constellations North of the Zodiac - - ° 28 
: XI. Constellations South of the Zodiac « - : 30 
. KIT. The Annual Seasons = - - - - 31: 
XIIL: The Influence of the Four Angles - - ° $2 
HIV. Tropicat, Equioctial, Fixed, and Bicorpores! Sigas - 34 
KV. Masculine and Feminine Signs - - . 85 
MVI. Mutual Configurations of the Signs - ° -. 36 
EVII. Signs commanding and obeyin ° : : b 
VIII. Signs beholding each other, a nd ofequal Pawes = ~_—sibid. 
- XIX. Signs inconjunct - - - ‘= 40 
XX. Houses of the Planets - ° - - - 41 
XXI. The Triplicities ? - - - : 43 
XXII, Exaltations - - - - - 45 
SAI. The Disposition of the Terms - - - - 
RXV. The Terms (according to Ptolemy) - ° - 5! 
XV. The Places and Degrees of every Planet 53 
XXXVI. Faces; Chariots, and other similar Attributes of the Planets 54 
XVI. Application, Separation, and other Faculties. - - 55 
BOOK I. ee 
» 1. General Division of the Subject - - - 58 
Il. Peculiarities observable throughout every entire Climate _ 60 
Ill. The Familiarity of the Regions of the Earth with the is 
plicities and the Plea 62 
a The Familiarity of the Regions of the Barth with “the 
_ fixed Starg ; - 76 
"MV. Mode of particular Prediction in Belipses - ibid. 


- RL The Regions or Cquntries to be considered as hebte to be 
: comprehended i in the Event 
“Wl. The Time and Period of the Event . . 
VIIL The Genus, Class, or Kind, liable to be affected 
IX. The Quality and Nature of the Effect - 
X. Colours in Eclipses, Comets, and similar Phenomena 
XI, The New Moon of the Year - - - 


et 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPs 


XII. The particular Natures of the Signs by which the different 
Constitutions of the Atmosphere are produced 


PAGE 


XIII. Mode of Consideration for particular convene of the 


Atmosphere 
XIV. The Signification of Meteors « 


BOOK III. 
J. Proem - 


Il. The Conception, and the ‘Parturition, or ; Birth; by which 


96 
100 


104 


latter Event the Animal quits the Womb, and assumes 


another State of Existence - _ 
IIL, The Degree ascending - 


IV. Distribution of the Doctrine of Nativities 


V. The Parents - - _ 
V1. Brothers and Sisters - 
VII. Male or Female - 
VIII. Twins - 
TX. Monstrous or defective Births 
X. Children not reared - 
XI. The Duration of Life - 
XII. The Prorogatory Places 


en € gre 


XIII. The Number of Prorogators, and also the Part of Fortune 


XIV. Number of the Modes of peeoroeener 
- XV. Exemplification 


XVI. The Form and Temperament of the Body 
XVII. The Hurts, Injuries, and Diseases of _ Body 


XVIII. The Quality of the Mind - 
XIX. The Diseases of the Mind - 


BOOK IV. 


I. Proem ~- 

II. The Fortune of Wealth - - 
III. The Fortune of Rank - 
‘IV. The Quality of Employment 

V. Marriage 

VI. Children - - 
VII. Friends and Enemies - 
VIII. Travelling - - 
IX. The Kind of Death - 

X.. The Periodical Divisions of Time 


APPENDIX, 
No. I. Almagest, Book viii, Chap. 4 - 


IJ. Extract from the Almagest, Book ii, Chap. 9 


Table of Latitudes, from the Almagest | 


Extract from the Table of ancensioms; in anne Almagest_ 


Hil, Ptolemy’s Centiloguy - 
IV. The Zodiacal Planisphere, and plate. 


> @ 8 © 9 8 


a 


aseaeo8 8 6 Ot Oe) 


o 


CORRIGENDA rr ADDENDA. 
Page 5, line 24, for “ last mentioned,” read “ of the seasons.” 
—— 8, the following addition should be made to the note; viz.— 
Cicero, in cap. 20, lib. 2, De Nat. Deor. also alludes to 
‘ another great year, as being completed on the return of 
the Sun, Moon, and the five planets, to some original con- 
figuration, “‘ inter se, confectis omnium spatiis ;” and of that 
revolution he says, ‘‘ que quam longa sit, magna quasstio 
“est; esse vero certam et definitam, necesse est.” Again, 
in writing of Hortensius, he says, “Is est magnus et 
“ verus annus, quo eadem positio cali siderumque que elm 
“ maximé est, rursum existet; isque annus horum, quos 
“ yocamus, annorum XII. M.pcccLiv. complectitur.” But 
in the “ Somnium Scipionis” his words are, “ tum signis 
“ omnibus ad idem principium stellisque revocatis, expletam 
“annum habeto.” It thus appears, that of three different 
cycles or periods, each was considered by Cicero.as form- 
ing a great year, although that which he has contemplated 
in Scipio’s Dream is the only one equivalent to the “ entire 
“return” of “all the heavenly bodies,” adverted to by 
Ptolemy. 
-——- 27. Incorroboration of the conjecture hazarded in the iste) 
as to the etymology of Antares, it. may be observed, that 
an authentic word, Anteros, the name of a deity in alliance 
with Cupid, has been similarly compounded: viz. from 
. als pro, and Bgee Cupido. 
-—— 40, line7 of the notes, for “new [aspects called,” read “ new 
“ aspects [called.” 
~——— 41, line 19 of the note, for “ Apology,” read “ Astrological 
“ Discourse.” 
—— 43, line 15, for “is nearest,” read “is placed nearest.” 
—— 57, line 10, for “holds,” read “ hold.” 
—— 61, line 2, for “who are here,” read “ who (as natives of these 
countries) are.” 
.—— 62, line 11, for “‘ domesticated,” read “ domiciliated.” 
—— 638, line 18, for “‘The four quadrants,” read “Of the four quad- 
rants,” 
—— 68, The note requires the following addition :—It seems, how- 
ever, that the Jows were charged with atheism by other 


CORRIGENDA ET ADDENDA (continued). 


writers also, and on account of their neglect of the false 
gods of the heathens; viz. “falsor'um deorum neglestus : 

- “ quam eandem causam etiam Judzis maledicendi Taci- 

“tus habuit, et Plinius Major, cui Judzi dicuntur gens 

_* contumelié. numinum insignis.” See Clark’s Notes to 

Grotius de Verit. Relig. Christ. Lib. 2, § 2. 
. Page 69, in note, for “ copies,” read “ editions.” 
—— 71, line 5, for “These females shun the addresses of men, as 
| the Amazons did of old,” read “These females, like the 
‘ Amazons, shun the addresses of men.” 

-—— 8], line 2 of the notes, for ‘‘ copies,” read “ editions.” 

—— 86,-line 27, for “and thrive,” read “ and will thrive ;” line 84, 

for ‘the world,” read ‘ = 

———- 87, line 2, for “‘is,” read “are.” 

=-—— 92, line 4, for “ their form,” read “ the form’ of the signs.” 

—— 94, line 4 of the notes, for “ copies,” read “ translations.” 

-—— 97, line 6 of the note, for “‘Sunis,” read “ Sun is ;” line 8, for 

: 6c 98, *read “94.” ' 

—— 98, line 21, for “ Moons,” read “Moon.” 

——— 111. The conjectural etymology of the word Animodar, ha- 
garded in the note, is erroneous ; the word being evident- 
ly derived from the Greek anew, extraho. 

—— 118, line 16, dele “of” . 

—— 114, chap. vy, line 5, for “to,” read ‘“ with.” 

———~ 119, line 17 and 18, for “indispensibly,” read “ indispensably.” 

——— 122, line 11, for “ indispensible,” read “ indispensable. ‘“ 

——=- 143, line 17, for * descension from,” read “descension, from.” 

——-— 151, line 15, for “ not any,” read “ none.” 

—— 160, line 28 and 29, for “energy the property,” read “energy 

; ' “ the properties.” 

—— 176, note, dele “and the table annexed thereto.” 

——~ 183, note *, for “copies,” read “ editions.” 

—— 189, line 2, for “contributes,” read “tends.” 

—— 208, line 21, for “ of whom acts,” read “acting,” 

—— 224, line 4, for “ now superseded,” read “ now, in some agree, 
‘. superseded.” - 


N.B. By an inadvertence, the name of a city in Italy has — erre- 
neously quoted in the Preface, and in the notea to the. Tran-. 
slation, as “ Perugio,” instead of “ Perugia.” 


PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, | 


OR 
FOUR ROOES 
OF THE 


FNPLEUENCE OF THE SPARS. 
re 
BOOK THE FIRST. 


Chapter I. 


Proem. 


“THE studies preliminary to astronomical prognosticatron, 
OQ Syrus! are two: the one, first alike in order and in power, 
leads tothe knowledge of the figurations of the Sun, the 
Moon, and the stars; and of their relative aspects to each | 
other, and to the earth: the ather takes into consideration 
the changes which their aspects create, by means of their 
natural properties, tm objects under their influence. | 

The first mentioned. study has been already explained in the 
Syntaxis * to the utmost practicable extent’; for it is comer 
plete in itself, and of essential utility even without being — 
blended with the second ; to which this treatise will be de- 
voted, and which is not equally seff-complete. The pre- 
sent work shaJ], hawever, be regulated by that due regard for 
truth which philosophy demands: and since the material 
quality of the objects acted upon renders them weak and 
variable, and difficult to be accurately apprehended, no po- 
sitive or infallible rules (as were given in detailing the first 





* The Almagest, or Magna Constructto. 
B 


A 


2 -  PTOLEMY’sS TETRABIBLOS. [Book I. 


doctrine, which is always governed by the same immutable 
laws) can be here set forth: while, on the other hand, a due 
observation of most of those general events, which evidently 
trace their causes to the Ambient, shall not be omitted. 
It is, however, a common practice with the vulgar to 
slander every thing which is difficult of attainment, and surely 
they who condemn the first of these two studies must be 
considered totally blind, whatever arguments may be pro- 
" duced in support of those who impugn the second. There 
are also persons who imagine that whatever they themselves 
have not been able to acquire, must be utterly beyond the 
reach of all understanding; while others again will consi- 
der as useless any science of which (although they may 
have been often instructed in it) they have failed to pre- 
serve the recollection, owing to its difficulty of retention. 
In reference to these opinions, therefore, an endeavour 
shall be made to investigate the extent to which prognosti- 
cation by astronomy is practicable, as well as serviceable, 
previously to detailing the particulars of the doctrine. 


@hapter I. 
Knowledge may be acquired by Astronomy to a certain Extent. 
Tat a certain power, derived from the sthereal nature, is 
diffused over and pervades the whole atmosphere of the 
earth, is clearly evident to all men. Fire and air, the first of 
the sublunary elements, are encompassed and altered by the 
motions of the ether. These elements in their turn encom- 


pass all inferior matter, and vary it as they themselves are 
varied; acting on earth and water, on plants and animals *. 





* The following extract from an old geographical work, framed 


on the rules of Ptolemy, explains the system on whieh this action of 
‘the ssther is made to depend :— 


Chap. II.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 3 


The Sun, always acting in connection with the Ambient, 
contributes to the regulation of all earthly things: not only 
by the revolution of the seasons does he bring to perfection 
the embryo of animals, ‘the buds of plants, the spring of 





“ Chap. 2. The world is divided into two parts, the elemental re- 
“‘ gion, and the ethereal. The elemental region. is constantly 
‘S subject to alteration, and comprises the four elements; carth, 
‘“‘ water, air and fire. The zthereal region, which philosophers call 
“ the fifth essence, encompasses, by its concavity, the elemental; 
‘* its substance remains always unvaried, and consists of ten spheres; 
‘“‘ of which the greater one always spherically environs the next 
* smaller, and so on in consecutive order.—First, therefore, around 
‘* the sphere of fire, Gop, the creator of the world, placed the sphere 
‘“‘ of the Moon, then that of Mercury, then that of Venus, then that 
*¢ of the Sun, and ‘afterwards those of Mars, of Jupiter, and of Sa- 
‘‘ turn. Each of these spheres, however, contains but one star: and 
“ these stars, in passing through the zodiac, always struggle against 
“ the primum mobile, or the motion of the tenth sphere ; they are also 
“* entirely lumihous. In the next place follows the firmament, which 
“< is the eighth or starry sphere, and which trembles or vibrates (tre- 
“‘ pidat) in two small circles at the beginning of Aries and Libra 
“ (as placed in the ninth sphere); this motion is called by astrono- 
“ mers the motion of the access‘and recess of the fixed stars.” (Pro- 
bably in order to account for the precession of the equinoxes.} 
‘¢ This is surrounded by the ninth sphere, called the chrystalline or 
“* ‘watery heaven, because no star is discovered in it. Lastly, the 
“< primum mobile, styled also the tenth sphere, encompasses all the 
“* before-mentioned zethereal spheres, and is continually tarned upon 
“ the poles of the world, by one revolution in 24 hours, from the east 
‘* through the meridian to the west, again coming round to the east. 
‘“< At the same time, it rolls all the inferior spheres round with it, by 
‘‘ its own force ; and there is no star in if. Against this primum mo- 
“‘ bile, the motion of the other spheres, running from the west 
“ through the meridian to the east, contends. Whatever is beyond 
“ this, is fixed and immoveable, and the professors of our orthodox 
“ faith affirm it to be the empyrean heaven which Gop inhabits with 
“ the elect.”—Cosmographia of Peter Apianus (named Benewitz), 
dedicated to the Archbishop of Saltzburg, edited by Gemma Frisius, 
and printed at Antwerp. ans 


4 PIOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, ) (Book {. 


waters, atid the alteration of bodies, ‘but by his daily pto- 
gress algo he operates other changes in light, heat, moisture, 
dryness and cold; dependent ugon his situation with regard 
to. the zenith, 
- The Moon, being of. al] the heavenly bodies the nearest to 
the Earth, also dispenses much influence; and things ani- 
Mate and. inanimate sympathize and vary with ber, By the 
changes of her illumination, rivers swell and are reduced; 
the tides of the sea are ruled by her risings and settings; 
aud plants and animals are expanded or collapsed, if not en- 
tirely at least partially, as she waxes or wanes. 
The stats ikewsse (as well the fixed stara as the planets), 
it performing their revolutions *, produce many impres- 
sions on the Ambient. They cause heats, winds, and storms, 
to the influence of which earthly things are conformably 
subjected. , 
And further, the mutual configurations of all these hea-. 
venty bodies, by commingling the influence with which 
each is séparately invested, produce a multiplicity of changes. . 
The power of the Sun however predominates, because it is 
more generally distributed; the others either co-operate 
with his power or diminish its effect: the Moon more fre-- 
ently and more plainly perforins this at her conjunction, 
at her first and last quarter, and at her opposition : the stars 
act also to a similar purpose, but at longer intervals and. 
more obscurely than the Moon; and their operation princi- 
palty depends upon the mode of their visibility, their oc- 
cultation and their declination. 
From these premises it follows not only that all bodies, 
which may be already compounded, afe subjected to the 
motion of the stars, but also that the impregnation and 





* It will be recollected that the Ptolemaic astronomy attributes 
motion and a regular course to those stars which we now call fixed, 
but which the Greeks merely termed «#Acarsi, undeviating. 


Chap. IT.) PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 5 


growth of the weeds from which all bodies proveed, are 
Framed and moulded by the quality existing in the Acabient 
at the time of sach impregnation and prowth. Anil it is 
‘upon this principle that the more observant husbandmen 
and shepherds are accustomed, by drawing their infereaces 
from the particular breezes which may happen at seedetirte 
and at the impregnation of theit cattle, to form predictions 
as to the quality of the expected prodace. In short, how 
ever unieatned ia the philosophy of nature, these men can 
foretel, solely. by their previous observation, all the mort 
peneral and usual effects which result from the plainer and 
mote visible. configurations of the San, Moon, and stars, 
It is daily seen that even most illiterate persons, with no 
other aid than their own experienced observation, are capa 
bie of predicting events which may be consequent on the 
tore extended influence of the Sun and the more simple 
order of the Ambient, and which may aot be open to varia= 
‘tion by any complex configurations of the Moon and stars 
towards the Sun. There are, moreover, among the brate 
creation, avitnals who evidently form prognostication, and 
use this wonderful instinct at the changes of the several 
seasons of the year, spting, summer, autumn and winter} 
and, algo, at the changes of the wind. — ‘ 
In producing the changes last mentioned, the Sun iteclf 
is chiefly the operating and visible cause. .There are, how- 
ever, other events which, although they are not indicated in 
so simple @ manner, but dependent on a slight complication 
of causes in the Ambient, afe also foreknown by persons 
who have applied theit observation to that end. Of this 
kind, are tempests and gales of wind, produced by certein 
_ aspects of the Moon, or the fixed stars, towards the Suny 
accotding to their eeveral courses, and the approach of 
which is usually foreseen by mariners. At the same time, 
prognostication made by persons of this class must be fre~ 
quently fallacious, owing to their deficiency in sckence and 


6 .PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book I. 


‘their consequent inability to give necessary consideration to 
the ‘time and place, or to the revolutions of the planets; all 
which circumstances, when exactly defined and understood, 
certainly tend towards accurate foreknowledge. 
When, therefore, a thorough knowledge of the motions 
_ of the stars, and of the Sun and Moon, shall have been ac- 
quired, and when the situation of the place, the time, and 
all the configurations actually existing at that place. and 
time, shall also be duly known; and such knowledge be yet 
further improved by an acquaintance with the natures of 
_ the heavenly bodies—not of what they are. composed, but 
of the effective influences they possess; as, for instance, that 
heat is the property of the Sun, and moisture of the Moon, 
and that other peculiar properties respectively appertain to 
the rest of them ;—when all these qualifications for pre- 
science may be possessed by any individual, there seems no 
obstacle to deprive him of the insight, offered at once by 
nature and his own judgment, into the effects arising out of 
the quality of all the various influences compounded toge- 
ther. So that he will thus be competent to predict the pe- 
culiar constitution of the atmosphere in every season, as, 
for instance, with regard to its greater heat or moisture, or 
other similar qualities; all which may be. foreseen by the 
visible position or configuration of the stars and the Moon 
_towards the Sun. . 
. Since.it is thus clearly practicable, by an accurate know- 
ledge of the points above enumerated, to make predictions 
concerning the proper quality of the seasons, there also 
seems no impediment to the formation of similar prognos- 
tication concerning the destiny and disposition of every 
human being. . For. by the constjtution of the Ambient, 
_ even at the time of any individual’s primary conformation, 
the general quality of .that individual’s temperament may be 
perceived; and the corporeal shape and mental capacity 
with which the person will be endowed at birth may be 


% 
Chap. II.] | PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. | 7 


pronounced; as well as the favourable and unfavourable 
events indicated by the state of the Ambient, and liable to 
attend the individual at certain future periods; since, for 
instance, an event dependent on one disposition of the 
Ambient will be advantageous to a particular temperament: 
and that resulting from another unfavourable and injurious.’ 
From these circumstances, and others of similar import, the 
_possibility of prescience is certainly evident. — | 

_There are, however, some plausible assailants of this doc-' 
trine, whose attacks although greatly misapplied seem yet 
worthy of the following observations. | 

In the first place, the science demands the greatest study 

and aconstant attention to a multitude of different points ; 
and as all persons who are but imperfectly practised in it 
must necessarily commit frequent mistakes, it has been sup- 
posed that even such events as have been truly predicted 
have taken place by chance only, and not from any opera- 
tive cause in nature. But it should be remembered that 
these mistakes ‘arise, not from any deficiency or want of 
power in the science itself, but from the incompetency of 
unqualified persons who pretend to exercise it. And besides 
this, the majority of the persons who set themselves up as 
‘professors of this science, avail themselves of its name and 
credit for the sake of passing off some other mode of divi- 
nation; by that means defrauding the ignorant, and pre- 
tending to foretel many things which from their nature 
cannot possibly be foreknowns and consequently affording 
opportunities to more intelligent people to impugn the va- 
lue even of such predictions as can rationally be made. 
The reproach, however, thus brought upon the science: is 
wholly unmerited ; for it would be equally just to condemn - 
all other branches of philosophy, because each numbers 
among its professors some mischievous pretenders, 

‘Secondly, it is not attempted to be denied that any indi- 
vidual, although he may have attained to the greatest possi- 


. 
wert: 
. 


& POLRMY'S TETRARIBLOS. [Fook ¥. 


ble accuracy in the science, must, stidl te hable to frequent 
error, arising out of the very nature of his undertaking, 
and fram the weakness of his limited capacity in comparison 
with the magnitude of his object. For the whole theory 
of the. quality of matter is supported. by inference rather 
than by positive and scientific proof; and this is caused 
principally by the concretion of its temperament out of 2 
Miultitude of disaimilas ingredients. And, although the 
former configurations of the: planets have been observed to 
praduce certain consequences (which have been adapted to 
configurations now taking place), and ane, after Jong periods, 
and in a greater o¢ lesa degree, resembled by subsequent - 
configurations, yet these subsequent configurations. never 
become exactly similar ta those which have preceded thens. 
For an. entire return of all the beavenly bodes to: the exact 
situation, in which they have onee atood with regard to. the: 
earth will never take, place, ov at least nat in any pesiod de~ 
terminable by human caleulation, whatever vain attempts 
may be made ta acquire suck unattainable knowledge *. 
The examples referred te for guidance being therefore nos 
exactly similar to the existing: cases to. which they ave now 
applied, tt. muat naturally follew thet predictions. are some- 
times not barne aut by the eweats. Hence: arises the sole 
difficulty in the consideration af events. preduced by the 
Ambient. Far na other concurrent eause has been hitherto 





* Thaze sners reason to suppose that this was a favorite specula- 
tion amang the autients. iz Scipie’s Dream, as related by Cicero, 
the phantom of his Wustrious graydfether i¢. made to speak of thia 
entire return of all the celestial bodies ta same original position 
whiek they had once held, as being the completion of the revolution 
af ane great untrecsal year: and the phantom adds, “ but I must ac- 
“" quaint you that net one-twentiett part of that great year has been 


" “ yet accompliahed.” 


ah notatien is fem memery, aad se may sat be verhally 
correc 


Chap. IL] PTOLEMY’S TEPRABIBLOS. 9 


combined with the motion of the heavenly bodies; although 
the doctrine of nativities, particularly that part of it re- 
lating to peculiar individual temperament, demands also 
the consideration of other concomitant causes, which are 
neither trifling nor unimportant, ‘but essentially potent in 
affecting the individual properties of the creatures born. 
Thus the variety in seed has the chief influence in supplying 
the peculiar quality of each species; for, under the same 
disposition of ‘the Ambient and of the horizon, each various 
kind of seed prevails in determining the distinct formation 
of its own proper species; thus man is born, or the horse 
is foaled; and by the same law are brought forth all the 
other various creatures and productions of the earth. It 1s 
also to be remembered, that considerable variations are caused 
in all creatures by the respective places where they may be 
brought forth: for although, under the same disposition of 
the Ambient, the germs of the future creatures may be of 
one species, whether human or of the’horse, the difference 
in situation, of the places in which they are generated, 

produces a dissimilarity in the body and spirit of one from 
the body and spirit of another: and in addition to this it 
must be considered that different modes of nurture, and the 
variety of ranks, manners, and customs, contribute to render 
the course of life of one individual greatly different from 
that of another * ; consequently, unless every one of these 





* In this passage the author seems to have anticipated, and ex- 
posed the absurdity of an argument -now considered very forcible 
against astrology: viz. that “if the art were true, then any two in- 
“ dividuals born under the same meridian, in the same latitude, and 
“ atthe same moment of time, must have one and the same destiny ; 
“ although one were born a prince, and the other a mendicant.” 
Sach a monstrous conclusien is nowhere authorized by any astrologi- 
cal writer ; itis, on the contrary, always maintained by all of them, 
that the worldly differences and distinctions, alluded to in the text, 
inevitably prevent this exact resemblance of destiny; and all that 

Cc 


a 


10 PLOLEMY’S TRTRABIBLOS. {Book I. 


varieties be duly blended with the causes arising in the Am- 
bient, the pre-judgment of any event will doubtless be very 
incomplete. For, although the greatest multiplicity of 
power exists in the Ambient, and although all other things 
act as concurrent causes in unison with it, and can ‘never 
claim it as a concurtent cause in subservience to them, 
there will still, nevertheless, be a great deficiency in predic-- 
tions attempted to be made by means of the heavenly mo- 
tions alone, without regard to the other concurrent causes 
just now adverted to. 

Under these circumstances, it would seem judicious 
neither to deny altogether the practicability of prescience, . 
because prognostications thus imperfectly derived are some- 
times liable to be fallacious; nor, on the other hand, to 
admit that all events, whatever, are open to previous enquiry; 
as if such enquiry could in all cases be securely conducted 
without having recourse to mere inference, and as if it were 
not limited by the narrow extent of mere human abilities. 
The art of navigation, for instance, 18 not rejected, although 
it is in many points incomplete; therefore the bare fact 
that predictions are frequently imperfect cannot authorise 





. they presume-to assert is, that, in their respective degrees, any two 

individuals, so born, will have a partial similarity in the leading fea- 
tures of their fate. Whether their assertion is uniformly borne out, 
I will net take upon me to Fee tee eo tean eee Pee 
‘subjoin the following fact :— 

In the newspapers of the month of February 1820, the death of a 
Mr. Sanruel Hemmings is noticed: it was stated that he had been 
an ironmonger, and prosperous in trade; that he was born on fhe © 
4th of June 1738, at nearly the same moment as his Iate Majesty, 
and in the same parish of St. Martin’s in the Fields; that he went 
into business for himself in October 1760; that he married on the 
Sth September, 1761; and finally, after other events of his life had 
resembled those which happened to the late King, that he died on 
Saturday the 29th January 1820. 

These coincidences are, at least, highly remarkable. . 


Chap, 11.) PTOLBMY’§ TETRABIRIAS. me} 


the rejection of the art of preacience: the magnitude of 
its scope, and the faint resemblance that it beara to a divine: 
attribute, should rather demand grateful commendations, 
and receive the utmost regard and attention. And, since . 
no weakness is imputed to a physician, because he enquires 
into the individual babit of his patient, as well as into the nae - 
ture of the disease, no imputation can justly attach to the 
professor of prognostication, because he combines the cons 
sideration of species, nurture, education snd country, with 
that of the motion of the heavens: for as the physician 
acts but reasonably, in thus considering the proper constitu- 
tion of the sick person as well as his disease.; so, in form- 
ing predictions, it must surely be justifiably allowable to 
comprehend in that consideration every other thing con- 
nected with the subject, in addition to the motion of tbe 
heavens, and to collect and compare with that motion all 
other co-operating circumstances arising elsewhere. 


Chapter UL 
That Prescience is useful. 

It appears, then, that presciende by astronomy is possible 
under certain adaptation 5 and that alone it will afford pre- 
monition, as far as symptoms in the Ambient enable it to 
do so, of all such events as happen to men by the influence 
of the Ambient. These events are, from their commence- 
Ment, always in conformity with the spiritual and corporeal 
faculties, and their occasional affections ; as well as with 
the shorter or longer duration of those affections. They are 
also conformable with other things which, although not ac- 
tually seated in man’s immediate person, are still absolutely 
and naturally connected with him :—in connection with his 
body they are applicable to his estate, and his conjugal co- 
habitations 5 in connection with his spirit, they relate to his 


12 © PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. - [Book ¥. 


offspring * and his rank; and they are also connected with 
all fortuitous circumstances which may occasionally befall 
him. 

That the foreknowledge of these can be attained has al- 
ready been demonstrated; and it remains to speak of the 
utility of the attainment. First, however, het it be said in 
what respect and with what view it is proposed to draw ad- 
vantage from this science ;—if it be considered in its tend- 
ency to promote the good of the mind, no object more 
advantageous can: surely be wanting to induce the world to 
rejoice and delight in it, since it offers an acquaintance 
with things divine and human: if it be considered in respect to 
the benefits it is capable of conferring on the body, its utility, 
in this view also, will be found on comparison to excel that 
of all other arts conducive to the comforts of life, for it is 
of more general application and service than all the others 
together, And, although it may be objected to the art 
of prescience, that it does not co-operate towards the ac- 
quirement of riches or glory, let it also be remembered 
that the same objection attaches to every other art and 
science; since there is not one which can of itself produce 
either riches or glory, nor yet is there one which is on that 
plea deemed useless : it seems, therefore, that the science of 
prognostication, with its high qualificatioys and its aptitude 
to the most important objects, does not, in any greater de- 
gree, deserve to be condemned. | 

In general, however, the persons who attack and repro- 
bate it as being useless, do not pay due regard to the manner 
in which it becomes necessary; but deny its utility on the 








* The Greek word for this, yer, though found in the Elzevir 
edition from which this translation is made, does not appear in other 
copies; the Basle edition of 1553 says merely, n Ts ri4n as ro afiapa, 
“ honor and rank,” which is the sense also given in the Latin transia- 
tion of Perugio, 1646, without ay mention of “ offspring.” 


Chap. 111] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 13 


specious argument that it is superfluous and puerile to at- 
tempt to foreknow things which must inevitably come to 
pass: thus considering it in a mode at once abstracted, un- 
learned, and unfair. For, in the first place, this fact ought 
to be kept in view, that events which necessarily and fully 
happen, whether exciting fear or creating joy, if arriving un- 
foreseen, will either overwhelm the mind with terror or 
destroy its composure by sudden delight; if, however, such 
events should have been foreknown, the mind will have been 
previously prepared for their reception, and will preserve an 
equable calmness, by having been accustomed to contem- 
plate the approaching event as though it were present, so 
that, on its actual arrival, it will be sustained with tranquillity 
and constancy. 

In the next place, it must not be imagined that all things 
happen to mankind, as though every individual circumstance 
were ordained by divine decree and some indissoluble super- 
nal cause; nor is it to be thought that all events are shewn 
to proceed from one single inevitable fate, without being 
influenced by the interposition of any other agency. Such 
an. opinion is entirely inadmissible; for it is on the contrary 
most: essential: to obserye, not only the heavenly motion 
which, perfect in its divine institution and order, is eternally 
regular. and undeviating; - but also the variety which exists 
in earthly things, subjected to and ‘diversified by the insti- 
tutions and courses of nature, and in connection with 
which the superior a aed in respect to the accidents 
produced. | 7 

It is further to-be remarked that -man is subject, not 
only to events applicable to his own private and individual 
nature, but also to others arising from general causes. He \ 
suffers, for instance, by pestilences, inundations, or confla- ~ 
grations, produced by certain extensive changes in the Am- 
bient, and destroying multitudes at once; since a greater” 
and more powerful agency must of course always absorb 


34 prokaay's S TETRABIBLOS. [ Book I. 


and overcome one that is more minute and weaker. In 
great changes, cfore, where 2 stronger cause predomi- 
nates, more general affections, jike those just mentioned, 
ate put in operation, but affections which attach to one in- 
dividual solely are excited when his own natural constitu- 
tion, peculiar to himself, may be overcome by some opposing 
impulse of the Ambient, however small or faint. And i 
this point of view it is manifest that all events whatsoever, 
whether genera] or particular, of which the primary cause 
is strong and irresistible, and against which no other con- 
trary agency has sufficient power to interpose, must of ne- 
cessity be wholly fulfilled; and that events indicated by a 
minor cause must of course be prevented and annihilated, 
when some other agency may be found contending for an 
opposite effect; if, however, no such opposing agency can 
be found, they also must be fulfilled, in due succession to 
the primary cause. Nevertheless, the fulfilment of events 
thus indicated must not be ascribed solely to the vigour of 
the cause producing them, nor to any inevitable fate, but 
rather to the absence of any opposing influence capable of 
prevention. And thus, with all things whatsoever which 
trace their cause and origin to nature, the case is exactly si- 
milar; for stones *, plants, animals, wounds, passions and 
, Giseases, all will of necessity operate on man to a certain 
degree; and they fail to do so, if antidotes be found and 
apphed against their influence. 

In exercising prognostication, therefore, strict care must 
be taken to foretel future events by that natural proeess only - 
which is admitted in the docttine here delivered; and, 
setting aside all vain and unfounded opinions, to Agee 
that, when the existing agency is manifold and great, and 

of 3 power sie acai to be resisted, the corresponcing 





* In allusion to the sympathetic powers mia attributed to 
conta stones, 


Chap. U1].] procasry’s rzTRamuzos. 15 
event which {t indicates shall sbgolutely take place; and 
also, in other cases, that another event shalj not happen when 
its exelting causes are counteracted by some intérposing in- 
" fluence. ‘{t is in this manner that experienced physicians, 
accustomed to the observation of diseases, foresee that some 
will be inevitably mortal, and that others are susceptible of 
cure. 

Thus, when any opinion ts given by the astrologer with 
respect to the various accidents liable to happen, it should 
be understood that he advances nothing more than this pro- 
position ; wiz. that, by the property inberent in the Ambient, 
any conformation of it, suitable to a particular temperament, 
being varied more or less, will produce ia that temperament 
some particular affection.. And it is alee to be understood 
that he ventures this opinion. with the same degree of con- 
fidence, as that with which a physician may declare that a 
certain wound will increase or grow putrid; or a man ac- 
quainted with metals say that the magnet * will attract iron. 
For neither the increase ner putrefaction of the wound, 
nor the magnet’s attraction of iron, is ordained by any in- 
evitable law, although these consequences must necessarily 
fallow, in due obedience to the first principles of the exist- 
ing order of nature, when no means of prevestion can be 





° iL) 

* Whalley, in translating this chapter, makes the following remark  —_ 
- on this mention of the magnet: “ However nach later it was that 
“* the loadstone became known & Europe, what is mentioned of it 
“ {fn this chaptermakes it evident that it was knewa in Egypt, where 
“ Ptolemy lived, in his time.”—That worthy translator forgot (if in- 
deed he ever knew) that the loadstene’s property of aftracting iron 
‘was known to Thales, and commented on &y Plato and Ansiodle, 

all of whom fived some centuries, more or less, before Ptolemy. Ji 
is its polarity that was not knewn ent” the dith or 12th cemtory; © 
and the French say that the earliest notice of that polsity is found 
in a ‘poem of Guyot of Prevence, whe was at the Emperer Frede- 
rick’s Court at Mentz in 1181.—Sce the French Hacyolopadia, ke. . 


16 PTOLEMY’S. TETRABIBLOS.. {Book I. 


found and applied. But, however, neither of these-conse- 
quences will take place, when. such antidotes shall be pre- 
sented as will naturally prevent them :—and a similar con- 
sideration should be given to the predictions of the astrolo- 
ger :—because, if garlick be rubbed on the magnet, iron 
- will experience no attraction.*; and if proper.medicines be 
applied to the wound, it will cease to increase or to putrefy. 
And therefore all events which happen to mankind take 


* Respecting the effect here asserted to be produced on the mag-. 
net by garlick, I have found the following mention in a book called 
«“ The Gardener’s Labyrinth,” printed at London in 1586... “‘ Here 
“ also I thought not to ouerpasse the maruellous discord of the ada- 
“ mantestone and garlike, which the Greekes name to be an Anti- 
“‘ patheia or naturall contrarietie betweene them; for such is the 
“ hatred or contrarietie between these two bodies, (lacking both 
‘“¢ hearing and feeling) that the adamant rather putteth away,: than 
‘‘ draweth to it, iron, if the same afore be tubbed with garlike; as. 
“ Plutarchus hath noted, and, .after him, Claudius Ptolemzus. 
“‘ Which matter, examined by diuers learned, and founde the con- 
“ trarie, caused them to judge, that those skilful men (especially 
“ Ptolemie) ment the same to be done with the Egyptian Garlike ; 
“« which Dioscerides wrote to be small garlike, and the same sweete 
“‘ in taste, possessing a bewtifull head, tending unto a purple colour. 
'« There be which attribute the same to Ophioscoridon, which 
«* Antonius Microphonius Biturix, a singular learned man, and wel 
“‘ practised in sundry skilles, uttered this approoued secrete to a 
‘“¢ friend whom he loued.” 

In the same book, the “Ophioscoridon” is thus spoken of: 
‘¢ There is another wild garlike which the Greekes name Ophioscori- 
“ don;.in English, Ramsies; growing of the owne accord in the 
“ fallow fieldes.” 

Cornelius Agrippa (according to the English translation) has stated 
that the presence of the diamond also neutralizes the attractive 
power of the magnet. But as that great magician was somewhat 
inclined to quibbling, it is not impossible that by the word he uses 
for ‘“ diamond” (viz. adamas) he may mean the adamant or loadstone ; 
which would reduce his assertion merely to this, that one magnet 
will counteract another. . 


Chap.[1I.] | PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. v 


. place also in the regular course of nature, when no impedi- 
ments thereto are found or known: but again, on the other 
_ hand, if any impediments or obstructions be found in the 
way of events which may be predicted by the regular course 


_ Of nature to happen; such events will either not take place 


at all, or, if they should take place, will be much diminished 
in their force and extent. 

The same order and consequence exist in all cases, whe- 
ther the events have a general or only a particular operation; 
_and it may therefore well be demanded, why prescience is 
believed to be possible as far as it regards general events, 
and why it is allowed to be serviceable in preparing for 

their approach; while in particular instances its power and 
use are altogether denied. That the weather and the sea- 
sons, and the indications of the fixed stars, as well as the 
configurations of the Moon, afford means of prognostica- 
tion, many persons admit; and they exercise this foreknow- 
ledge for their own preservation and comfort, adapting their — 
constitutions to the expected temperature, by cooling and 
refreshing things for the summer, and by warm things for 
the winter. They also watch the significations of the fixed 
stars, to avoid dangerous weather, in making voyages by — 
sea; and they notice the aspects of the Moon, when at the — 
' full, in order to direct the copulation of their herds and 
flocks, and the setting of plants or sowing of seeds: and 
there is not an individual who considers these general 
precautions as impossible or unprofitable. Still, however 
- .these same persons withhold their assent to the possibility 
of applying prescience to particular cases; such, for 10- 
stance, as any particular excess or diminution of cold or heat, 
whether arising out of the peculiar temperament producing 
the original cold or heat, or from the combination of other 
properties; nor do they admit that there are any means of 
guarding against many of these particular circumstances. — 
And yet, if it be clear that persons, who prepare themselves © 

_ Bb Te 


18 ‘PTOLEMY’S .TETRABIBLOS. [Book I. 


by cooling things, are less affected by any general heat of the 
weather, there seems no reason for supposing that-a similar 
preparation would not.be equally effectual against any par- 
ticular conjuncture oppressed by immoderate heat. It ap- 


pears, however, that this idea, of the impracticability of at- 


taining foreknowledge of particular circumstances, .must 
originate solely in the mere difficulty of the acquirement; 
which difficulty -is certainly rendered peculiarly arduous by 
the necessity of conducting the enquiry with the greatest 
accuracy and precision: and to this it must.be added, . that, 
as there is rarely found a person capable of arranging the 
whole subject so perfectly that no part of the opposing in- 
fluence can escape his attention, it frequently happens that 
predictions are. not properly regulated by due consideration 


‘of that opposing influence, and that the effects are at once 
_considered fully liable to be brought to pass, agreeably to 


the primary agency and without any intervention. This 
defect, of not sufficiently considering the opposing: in- 
fluence, has -naturally induced an opinion that.all future 
events .are entirely unalterable and inevitable. . But, 
since the foreknowledge of particular circumstances, al- 
though it may not wholly claim infallibility,. seems yet : so 
far practicable as'to merit consideration, so the precaution 
it affords, in. particular circumstances, deserves in.Jike man- 
her to be attended to; and, if it be not of universal advan- 
tage, but useful in few instances only, it is still most wor- 
thy of estimation, and to be considered of no..moderate 
value. .. Of this, the Aigyptians seem to have been well 
aware; their discoveries of the great faculties of this science 
have exceeded those of other nations, and they have in.all 
cases combined the medical art with astronomical prognos- 
tication. And, had they been of opinion that all expected 


“ events are unalterable and not to be averted, they. never 


would have instituted any propitiations, remedies, and pre- 
servatives against. the influence of the Ambient, whether 
present or approaching, general or particular. But, by 


| Chap. TIT.) PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. | 19 


means of the science called by them Medical Mathematics, 
they combined with the power of prognostication the con- 
current secondary influence arising out of the institutions 
and courses of nature, as well as the contfary influence 
which might be procured out of nature’s variety; and by 
means of these they rendered the indicated ‘agency useful 
and advantageous: since their astronomy pointed out to 
them the kind of temperament hiable to be acted upon, as 
well as the events about to proceed from the Ambient, and 
the peculiar influence of those events, while thei? medical 
skill made them acquainted with every thing suitable or un- 
suitable to each of the effects to be produced. And it is 
by this process that remedies for present and preservatives 
against future disorders are to be acquired ; for, without as- 
tronomical knowledge, medical aid would be most frequently 
unavailing ; since the same identical remedies are not better 
calculated for all persons whatsoever, than they are for all 
diseases whatsoever *. | 
. The practicability and utility of prescience having been 
thus far briefly explained, the ensuing discourse must be 
proceeded with. It commences, introductorily, with an 
~ account of the efficient properties of each of the heavenly 
bodies, taken from the rules of the antients, whose obser- 
vations were founded in nature.—And, first, of the influences 
of the planets and of the Sun and Moon. 


|  @bapter Iv. 
The Influences of the Planetary Orbs. 


Tax Sunt is found to produce heat and moderate dry- 
ness. § His magnitude, and‘the changes which he. so 
evidently makes in the seasons, render his power more 





* This seems to explain the origin of the old alliance between 


medicine and astrology, so universally preserved until almost within © 
the last century. 


t It will be recollected that the Ptolemaic hypothesis considers 


20 PTOLEMY’S TETRARIBLOS, = [Book }. 


plainly perceptible than that of the other heavenly badiess 
since his approach to the zenith of any part of the earth 
creates a greater degree of heat in that part, and proporti- 
onately disposes its inhabitants after his own nature. 

The Moon principally generates moisture; her proximity 
to.the earth renders her highly capable of exciting damp 
vapours, and of thus operating sensibly upon animal bodies 
by relaxation and putrefaction, She has, however, also a 
moderate share in the production of heat, in a 
of the illumination she receives from the Sun. | 

Saturn produces cold and dryneas, for he is most remote — 
both from the Sun’s heat and from the earth’s vapours, 
But he is more effective in the production of cold than of 
dryness. And he and the rest of the planets derive their 
energy from the positions which they hold with regard to 
the Sun and Moon ; and they are all seen. taalter the con~ 
stitution of the Ambient in various ways. 

Mars chiefly causes dryness, and is also strongly heating, 
by means of his own fiery nature, which is indicated by his 
colour, and in consequefice of his vicinity to the Sun; the 
sphere of which ia immediately below him. 

Jupiter revalyes in an intermediate sphere between the 
extreme cold of Saturn and the burning heat of Mars, and 
has consequently a temperate influence: he therefore at 
once promotes both warmth and moisture. Bat, owing to 
the spheres of Mars and the Sun, which lie beneath him, his 
warmth is predominant: and henee he produces fertilizing 
breezes. . ; 

To Venus also the same temperate quality. belongs, al-_ 
though it exists conversely ; since the heat she produces by 
her vicinity to the Sun is not so great as the moisture 
which she generates by the magnitude of her light, and by 
al a een ee a Bel a 


the Suu asa planetary orb, in consequence of his apparent progress 
through the zodiac. 


Chap. V.] PTOLEMY’S TETRARIBLOS. a} 
appropriating to herself the moist vapours of. the earth, ‘im 
the same manner that the Moon does, 

Mercury sometimes produces dryness, and at other times 
moisture, and each with equal vigour. Hie faculty of ab- 
sorbing moisture and creating dryness praceede from hia six 
tuation with regard to the Sun, from which he is at no time 
far distant in longitude; and, on the ather hand, he produces 
- Moisture, because he borders upon the Moon’s sphere, which 
is nearest to the earth; and, being thus excited by the velar 
city of his motion with the Sun, he consequently operetes — 
rapid changes tending to produce alternately either quality. 


Chapter V. 
Benefics and Malefics, 


Os the four temperaments or qualities above mentioned, 
two are nutritive and prolific, viz, heat and moisture; by 
these all matter coalesces and is nourished: the other two 
are noxious and destructive, viz. dryness and cold; by these 
all matter is decayed and dissipated, — 

Therefore, two of the planets, on account of their tempe- 
rate quality, and beeause heat and moisture are predominant . 
in them, are considered by the antienta as benefic, or 
causers of good: these are Jupiter and Venns. And the 
Moon alsa is so considered for the same reasons. - 

But Saturn and Mars are esteemed of a cantrary nature, 
and malefic, or causers of evil s—~the first from his excess of 
cold, the other from his exceas of dryness. 

The Sua and Mercury are deemed of common influence, 
and productive either of good or evil in unison with whate- 
ver planets thay may be connected with. 


Chapter VI. 
Masculine and Femme. . 
THERE are twa primary sexes, male and female; wa the 
female sex partakes chiefly of moisture. The Mioon and 


22 ‘PYOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. = [Book I. 
Venus are therefore said to be feminine, since ‘their qualities 
are principally moist. 

The Sun, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars are called masculine. 
Mercury is common to both genders, because at certain 
times he produces ‘dryness, and at others ‘moisture, and 
performs each in an equal ratio. 

The stars, however, are also said to be masculine and 
feminine, by their positions with regard to the Sun. While 
they are matutine and preceding the-Sun, they are mascu- 
line; when vespertine and following the Sun, they become _ 
feminine *. 

And they are further regulated in this respect by their 
,positions with regard to the horizon. From the ascendant 
to the mid-heaven, or from the angle of the west to the 
lower heaven, they are considered to be masculine, being 
then oriental: and in the other two quadrants, seaman 
being then occidental. | 


Chapter VII. 


Diurnal and Nocturnal. 


Tne day and the night are the visible divisions of time.- 
The day, in its heat and its aptitude for action, is mascu- 
line:—the night, in its moisture and its appropriation to 
yest, feminine. 

Hence, again, the Moon and Venus are esteemed to be 
nocturnal; the Sun and Jupiter, diurnal; and Mercury, 
common; since in his matutine position et is diurnal, but 
nocturnal when vespertine. 

Of the other two planets, Saturn and Mars, which are 
noxious, one is considered to be diurnal, and the other noc- 





* “ Astronomers call the planets matutine, when, being oriental 
“« from the Sun, they are above the earth when he rises ; and vesper- 
* tine, when they set after him.”—Moxon’s Mathematical Dictionary. 


Chap. VIII.]  ProLEMy’s TRTRABIBLOS. 23 


turnal. Neither of them, however, is allotted to that divi- 
sion of time with which its nature accords, (as heat accords 
with heat), but each is disposed’ of on a contrary principle : 
and for this reason, that, although the benefit is increased, 
when a favourable temperament receives an addition of its 
own nature, yet, the evil arising from a pernicious influence’ 
is much mitigated when dissimilar qualities are mingled 
with that influence. Hence the coldness of Saturn is allotted 
to the day, to counterbalance its heat; and the dryness of 
Mars to the night, to counterbalance its moisture. Thus 
each of these planets, being moderated by this cémbination, 
is placed in a condition calculated to produce a favourable - 
temperament *. 


Chapter VIII. 
The Influence of Position with regard to the Sun. 
THE respective powers of the Moon and of the three supe- 
rior planets are either augmented or diminished by their 
‘several positions with regard to the Sun. 

The Moon, during her increase, from her first emerging 
to her first quarter, produces chiefly. moisture: on continu- 
ing, her increase from her first quarter to her full state of 
illumination, she causes heat; from her full state to her third 
quarter she causes dryness; and from her third quarter to 
her occultation she causes cold. 

The planets, when matutine, and from their first emerging 
until they arrive at their first station, are chiefly productive 
of moisture; from their first station until they rise at night, 





- © Whalley. here appends the following note: “To this chapter 
“may be properly added, that a planet is said to be diurnal, when, in 
*¢ « diurnal nativity, above the earth; and, in a nocturnal nativity, 
“ ander the earth: but nocturnal, when, in a nocturnal nativity, 
“ above the earth; or, in a diurnal nativity, under the earth.” 


24 PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. [Book I. 


of heat; from their rising at night until their second. sta- 
tion, of dryness; and from their second station until their 
occultation, they produce cold *. 

But it is also sufficiently plain that they must likewise 
cause, by their Mtermixture with each other, many varieties 
of quality in the Ambient: because, although their indivi- 
dual and peculiar influence may for the most part prevail, 
it will still be more or less varied by the power of the other 
heavenly bodies configurated with them. 


Chapter IX. 


The Influence of the fixed Stars. 


NEXT in succession, it is necessary to detail the natures and 
properties of the fixed stars; all of which have their respec- - 
tive influences, analogous to the influences of the planets : 
and those stars which form the constellations of the zodiac 
require to be first described. 


Aries, 
The stars in the head of Aries possess an influence simi- 


lar in its effects to that of Mars and Saturn: those in the 
mouth act similarly to Mercury, and in some degree to 





* Although all the positions mentioned in this paragraph are not 
applicable to Venus and Mercury, which can never rise at night, 
that is to say, at sunset, and although the author in the beginning of 
the chapter speaks only of the Moon and the three superior planets, 
there yet seems no Yeason why the orbits of Venus and Mercury 
should not be similarly divided by their inferior and superior conjunc- 
tions, and their greatest elongations. 

The folowing is from Whalley: “ The first station, in this chap- . 
“ ter mentioned, is when a planet begins to be retrograde; and the 
“ second atation when, from retrogradation, a planet becomes direct. 
: oe planets) “begin to rise at night when in opposition to 

e San. 


Chap.. IX.] PTOLEMY’'8. TRTRABIBLOS. : 25 
Saturn; those in the hinder foot, to Mars s those in the 
tail, to Venus. 

Taurus, 


Those stars in Taurus, which are in the abscission of the 
sign, resemble in their temperament the influence of Venus, _ 
and in some degree that of Saturn: those in the Pleiades are 
like the Moon and Mars. Of the stars in the head, that 
one of the Hyades which is bright and ruddy, and called 
Facula*, has the same temperament as Mars: the others 
' Yesemble Saturn, and, partly, Mercury; ‘and. those at the 
top of the horns are like Mars. 


Gemini. 


The stars im the feet of Genini have an influence similar 
to. that of Mercury, and moderately to that. of Venus. 
The bright stars in. the thighs are like Saturn: of the two 
bright stars on the heads, the one, which precedes and is 
called Apollo +, is like Mercury; the other which follows, 
called Hercules f, is like Mars. 


Cancer. 


The two stars in the eyes of Cancer are of the same in- 
fluence as Mercury, and are also moderately like Mars.. 
Those in the claws are like Saturn and Mercury. The — 
nebulous mass in the breast, called the Praesepe, has the 
same efficacy as Mars and the Moon. The two placed on 
either side of the nebulous mass, and called the Asini, have 
an influence similar to that.ef Mars and the Sun. 


‘ Leo. 


Of the stars in Leo, two in the head are hike Saturn, and | 
partly like Mars, The. three in. the neck are like Saturn, 





* The little Torch; now known by the name of Aldebaran. 
+ Castor. t Pollux. 
E 


26 PTOLEMY'S TETRABIBLOS. [Book I: 


and in some degree like Mercuty. The bright one in: the 
heart, called Regulus *, agrees with Mars and Jupiter. 
Those in the loins, and the bright one in the tail, are like 
Saturn and Venus: those in the thighs resemble Venus, 
and, in some degree, Mercury. 


Virgo. 


The stars in the head of Virgo, and that at the top of fe 
southern wing, operate like Mercury and somewhat like 
Mars: the other bright stars in the same wing, and those 
about the girdle, resemble Mercury in their influence, and 
also Venus, moderately. The bright one in the northern 
wing, called Vindemiator, is of the same influence as Saturn 
and Mercury: that called Spica Virginis is like Venus and 
. partly Mars: those at the points of the feet and at the bot- 
tom of the garments are like Mercury, and also Mars, mo- 
derately, 


e 


Libra fF. 
Those‘stars at the points of the claws of Scorpio operate 
like Jupiter and Mercury: those in the middle of the claws, 
like Saturn, and in some degree like Mars. 





* Cor Leonis. - 
$ Called by the antients yaa, Chele, or the claws of Scorpio; 
‘which sign they made to consist of 60 degrees, omitting Libra. 
Thus Virgil in the first Georgic, line 33, &c. 
Quo locus Erigonen inter, Chelasque sequentes 
Panditar : ipse tibi jam brachia contrahit ardens 
Scorpius, et coeli justa plus parte reliquit. 
Ovid, likewise, takes the following notice of Scorpio :— 
Porrigit in spatium signorum membra duorum. 


Met. 2, 1. 198. 
i‘ | 


Chap. 1X.] ' PTOLBMY’S TETRABIBLOS. : 27 


Scorpio. 

The bright stars in the front of the body of Scorpio 
have an effect similar to that produced by the influence of 
Mars, and partly to that produced by Saturn: the three in 
. the body itself, the middle one of which, called Antares *, 

is ruddy and more luminous, are similar to Mars and mode- 
rail Jupiter: those in the joints of the tail are like 
Saturn and partly like Venus: those in the sting, like Mer- 
cury and Mars. The nebula is like Mars and the Moon. 


Sagittarius. 


The stars at the point of the arrow in Sagittarius have 
influence similar to that of Mars and the Moon: those on 
the bow, and at the grasp of the hand, act like Jupiter and 
Mars: the nebula in the face is like the Sun and Mars: 
those in the waist and in the back resemble Jupiter, and 
also Mercury moderately: those in the feet, Jupiter and 
Saturn : the four-sided figure in the tail is similar to Venus, 
and in some degree to Saturn. | 


iw) 


Capricorn. 
The stars in the horns of Capricorn have efficacy similar 


to that of Venus, and partly to that of Mars. The stars in 


the mouth are like Saturn, and partly like Venus: those in 
the feet and in the belly act in the same manner as Mars and 
Mercury: those in the tail are like Saturn and Jupiter. 





’* Adams’s Treatise on the Globes calls this star “ Kalb al Akrab, 
or the Scorpion’s heart,” and adds, that “the word Antares (if it is 


not a corruption) has no signification.” But it should be observed — 


that Ptolemy states that this star partakes of the nature of Mars: it 
seems therefore not improbable that Antares may be a regular Greek 
word, compounded of avr: pre and «pus Mars, and signifying Mars’s 
deputy, or lieutenant, or one acting for Mars. 


28 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. {Book ¥. 
. —- Aquarius. | 

“The stars in the shoulders of Aquarius operate hike Satarn 

and Mercury; those in the left hand and in the face do the 

same: those in the thighs have an influence more consonant. 

with that of Mercury, and in a less degree with that of 


Saturn: those in the stream of water have power similar to 
that of Saturn, and, moderately, to that of Jupiter. 


Pisces. 


Those stars in Pisces, which are in the head of the south- 
ern fish, have the same influence as Mercury, and, in some 
degree, as Saturn: those in the body are like Jupiter and 
Mercury: those in the tail and in the southern line are 
like Saturn, and, moderately, like Mercury. In the northern 
- fish, those on its body and back-bone resemble . Jupiter, 

and also Venus in some degree: those in the northern line 
are like Satarn and Jupiter; and the bright star in the knet 
acts like Mars, and moderately like Mercury *. 


Chapter X. 
Constellations North of the Zodiac. 


THE constellations .north of the zodiac have their respec- 


tive inflaences, analogous to those of the planets, existing 
an the mode described in the following list. 





'* Salmon, in his “ Hore Mathemuticze, or Soul of Astrology’ 
(printed by Dawks 1679) divides each sign of the zodiac into six 
faces of five degrees each, “ because that in every sign there are 
‘“‘ various stars of differing natures ;’ and he gives a particular de- 
scription to each face, depending on its ascension or calmization. 
This scems an attempt to adapt Ptolemy’s signification of ‘the seve- 
ral stars, composing the different signs, to some general rale er mode 
of judgment: but it does not merit the implicit assent of .astrole- 
gers. It is understood that Salmon was not the inventor ‘of this di- 


vision of the signs into faces, but that it came originally from the 
Arabian schools. 


Chap. X.] PIULEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. 29 
Ursa Minor. The bright stars in ‘this constellation are like 
Saturn, and in some degree like Venus. 
Ursa Major. is like Mats, but the nebula under the tail re- 
| semibles‘the Moon and Ventis in ‘its ‘irifluente. 
_ Draco . . . . The bfight stars‘operate like ‘Saturh and Mate. 
Cepheus . « is like Saturn and Jtipiter. 
Bootes... is like Mercury and Saturn; but the bright 
| and ruddy star, called Arcturus, is like Mars 
and Jupiter. 
Corona Borealis 3s like Vents und Mercury. 
Fereles (or the Kneéler) is dike ‘Mercury. 
Tajra «wis like Vents dnd ‘Mercury. 
Cygnus . . . Venus and Mercury. 
Cassiopeia, . . Saturn and Venus. 
Persews . . . Jupiter and Saturn: but the heals’ in 
the hilt of the sword, is like Mars and 
' Mercury. 
wuriga . . . . . The bright stars are like Mis 
| a and Merctrry. | 
Serpentarius . . . 48 like Satum, and moderately like 
‘Venus. 
Serpens . . . +.» -§s like Satutn and Mars. 
Sapittu . » . . + . + Saturn, and moderately ike 
| Venus, 
Aquila. . . « » ‘iltke ‘Mars said) Jupiter: 
Delphinus . . . « . -Saturn and Mars. — 
Equus (or Pegasus) The bright:stars are like Mats and 
Merttiry. 
Andromeda . . . . is like Venus. _ 
_ Delta (or the Triangle) .. . ‘Mercury. 


30 PTOLEMY’S TRTBRABIBLOS. [Book I. 


Chapter XI. 
Constellations South of the Zodiac. 


THE influences of the constellations south of the moans 
existing in a similar mode, are as follow:— 

Piscis Australis . The bright star in the mouth is of 

| the same influence as Venus and Mer- 
cury.. 

Cetus . . =. . 18 like Saturn. 

Orion . . . . The stars on the shoulders operate si- 

- milarly to Mars and Mercury; and the 
other bright stars to Jupiter and Sa- 
turn. 

Fluvius, or Eridanus. The last bright one is of the same 
influence as Jupiter; the rest are like 
Saturn. | 

Lepus . . . . is like Saturn and Mercury. 

Canis . . . . The bright star in the mouth is like 
Jupiter, and partly like Mars: the 
others are like Venus. 

Procyon® . . . The bright star is like Mercury, and 
in some degree like Mars. 

Hydrus . . . . The bright stars are like Saturn and 
Venus. 

Crater . . « © is like.Venus, and in some degree like 
Mercury. 

Corvus . . . . is like Mars and Saturn. 

4rgo. . . » « The bright stars are like Saturn and 

Jupiter. 

Centaurus . . . The stars in the human part of the 
figure are of the same influence as 
Venus and Mercury: the bright stars 

a 

* Canis Minor. 


Chap. XII.] —- pTOLEMY’s’ TETRABIBEOS. 31 


. in the horse’s part are like Venus and — 
Jupiter. 
. Lupus . . . © The bright stars are like Saturn, and 
partly like Mars. 
Ara . . « « © 1s like Venus, and also Mercury in 
some degree. 
Corona Australis .. The bright stars are like Saturn and 
; Jupiter. ? 
The respective influences of the several stars have been 
observed by the antients to operate in conformity with the 
mode pointed out in the foregoing distributions *. 


@hapter XII. 
The Annual Seasons. 


THE year comprises four seasons ; spring, summer, autumn, 
and winter: of these, the spring partakes chiefly of mois- 
ture, for on the dissipation of cold and recommencement 
of warmth, an expansion of the fluids takes place: the 
- summer is principally hot, owing to the Sun’s nearest ap- 
proach to the zenith: the autumn is principally dry, be- — 
cause the recent heat has absorbed the moisture: and the 
winter, is chiefly cold, the Sun being then at his farthest 
distance from the zenith. 
The beginning of the whole zodiacal circle, (which in 





* “ Of the fixed stars in general,” Whalley says, “ those of the 
“‘ greatest magnitude are the most efficacious ; and those in, or near, 
“ the ecliptic, more powerful than those more remote from it. They 
‘“‘ with north latitude and declination affect us most. They in the 
‘* zenith, influence more than others, more remote. Likewise such 
“* as are in partile conjunction with, or in the antiscions of any pla- 
“ net, or which rise and set, or culminate with any planet, or are 
“ beheld by any planet, have an increasé of power: but of them- 

- “ selves the fixed stars emit no rays.” — 


dl 


32 PYOLBMY'S TEPRABIBIOS, § $Book. I. 
its nature as.a circle can have no other beginning, nor end, 


capable of being determined,) is therefore assumed to be’ 


the sign of Aries, which. commences at the vernal equinox *: 
since the moisture of spring forms a primary beginning in 


the zodiac, analogous to the beginning of all animal life; 


which, in its first age of existence, abounds principally in 
moisture: the spring too, like the first age of animal life, 


is soft and tender; it is therefore suitably placed as the. 


opening of the year, and is followed by the other seasons 
in appropriate succession. The summer comes second, 
and, in its vigour and. heat, agrees with the second age of 
animals ; the prime of life, and the period most abounding 
in heat. Again, the age when the prime of. life has passed 
- away, and in which decay prepares to advance, is chiefly 
abundant in dryness, and corresponds to the autumn. And 
the final period of old. age, hastening to dissolution, 18 
pene cold, like the winter. 


@hapter XIII. 
The Influence ofi the Four Angles. 


Taek angles are the four cardinal points of the horizon, 
whence are derived the general names of the winds. With 





* This sentence shews the futility of the objection raised against 
astrology (and mentioned in the Preface to this translation) that 
the signs have changed and are changing “places. It is clear 
from this sentence that Ptolemy ascribes to the 30 degrees after the 
vernal equinox, that influence which he has herein mentioned to 
belong to Aries; to the next 30 degrees, the influence herein said 
to belong to Taurus; and so of the rest of the zodiac. We should 
rather say that the stars have changed places, than that the parts of 
Heaven, in which they were once situated, have done so. Ptolemy 
himself seems to have foreseen this groundless objection of the 
moderns, and has written, in the 25th chapter of this book, what 
ought completely to have prevented it. It has certainly been one 
of the misfortunes of astrology te be attacked by people entirely 
ignorant of its principles. 


Cd 


._Chap. XIII.] pro_emy’s. TETRABIBLOS. 33 


- respect to their qualities, tt is to be observed that the eastern 
point, or angle of the ascendant, is chiefly dry in its nature ; 

- because, on the Sun’s arrival therein, the damps occasioned 
by the night begin to be dried up: and all winds blowing 
from that quarter, under the common name of east winds, 
are arid and free from moisture. 

The southern point, or angle of the itd heaven: is the 
-most hot ; because the Sun’s meridian position, which pro- 
duces greater warmth and heat, declines (in this part of the 
earth,) towards the south. The -winds, therefore, which 
blow from that quarter, and are commonly called south 
winds, are hot and rarefying. 

The western point, or occidental angle, is moist ; because, 
when the Sun is there, the moisture, which had heen over- 
powered during the day, recommences its operation : and 
the winds proceeding from thence, and commonly called 
west winds, are light and damp. | 

The northern point, or angle of the lower heaven, is the 
most cold; for the Sun’s meridian position in this part of 
the earth i far removed from it in declination: and all 
winds thence proceeding, under the common name of north 
winds, are cold and frosty. 

It will, of course, be seen that a thorough acquaintance 
with the foregoing matters is essential in order to acquire 
the faculty of distinguishing’ temperaments in every shape 
and variation : since it is sufficiently obvious that the effec- 
tive influence of the stars must be greatly diversified by 
the constitutions of the seasons, as well as those of the ages 
of life, and of the angles ; and also that the stars have a 
much stronger influence on any constitution, when there 
may not be in it any tendency contrary to their own, as 
the whole influence is then entire and unalloyed. . For 
example, stars effecting: heat operate more vigorously in 
constitutions of heat; and those effecting moisture in 
constitutions of moisture. -On the other hand, should 

F 


ad PYOLEMY’SR TETRABIBLOS, [ Beok I. 
a tendency, contrary ta their own, exist in any consti- 
tution, the stars accordingly become less efficaciéus; in 
consequence of being attempered and mixed with that con- 
trary tendency: and this happens, for instance, when stars 
effeeting heat are attempered by constitutions of cold, or 
stars producing moisture by constitutions of dryness. The 
influence of every star is thus modified hy the proportionate 
admisture presented by. constitutions of a nature different 
from its own. 
. Jn succession to the previous instructions, the following 
deacription of the natural and peenliar properties of the 
signs of the zodiac is annexed: the general temperaments 


_ Of the signs are analogous te those of the seasons, which 


are respectively established under each sign, but they have, 
algo, vertain peculiar energies, arising from their familiarity 
with the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, which shall be here- 
after specified ;—and the simple and unmixed influences 
existing ia the signs, as considered only in themselves and 
with segard to each other, will be first stated. 


Chapter XIV. 
Tropical, Equinoctial, Fixed, and Bicorporeal Signs. 


Amona the twelve signs, some are termed tropical, others 
equinoctial, others fixed, and others bicorporeal. 

The tropical signs are two: viz. the first thirty degrees 
efter the summer solsticc, which compose the sign of Can- 
gers and the first thirty degrees after the winter solstice, 
composing the sign of Capricorn. These are calted tropical, 
because the Sun, after he has arrived at their first points, 
‘seems to turn, and to change his course towards a contrary 


latitude * ; causing summer by the turn he makes in Can- __ 


cer, and winter by that which he. makes in Capricorn. 
There aze also two equinoctial signs: Aries, the first 





# En other words, the Sun then begins to diminish his dectination, 
which, at the first points of the said signs, is at its greatest amount. 


' 


‘Chap. XIV.] = Prorny’s TETRASIILOS. 35 


_after the vernal equinox 3 and Labrs, the first after thre au. 
tumnal equinox : they are so Called, because the 8un, when 
im the first point of cither, makes the day and night equat. 

Of the remaining eight signs, four are fixed, and four 
bicorporeal. Those signs, which severally follow mnmediately 
after the two tropical and the two equinoctial. signe, are 
termed fixed, because, during the Sun’s presence in them, 
the cold, heat, moisture or dryness, of the season, which 

commenced on his arrival in the preceding tropical or equt- 
noctial sign, is then more firmly established -—not, however, 
that the temperament of the season has in itself actually 
increased m vigour, but, having continued for some tithe 
in operation, it then renders all things more strongly affected 
by its mrfluence. 

The bicorporeal signe severally follow the fixed signs ; 
and, being thus intermediately placed betweeh the fixed and 
the tropical signs, they participate in the constitutional pro- 
perties of both, from their firet to their last degrees. 


Chapter XV. 
Masculine and Feminine Signs. . 
Again, amiong the twelve signs, six are called masculine 
and diurnal, and six feminine and nocturnal. They are 
m alternate onder, one after the other, as the day is 

{ followed by the night, and as the male is coupled with the 
fenrale. 

The commencement, it has bee already said, belongs to 
Aries; since the moisture of the spring forms an introduc- 
tion for the other seasons. And, as the male sex governs, 
and the active principle takes precedence of the passive, the 
signs of Aries and Libra are conseqnently considered to be | 
masculine and diurnal. These signs describe the equinoc- 
tial circle, and from them proceed the principal variation, 
and moet powerful agitation, of all things.’ The signs im- 
mediately following them are feminine and nocturnal; and 


36 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. = [Book I. 


the rest are consecutively arranged as masculine and femi- 
nine, by alternate order. 

Masculine or feminine qualities are, however,’ by some 
-persons, attributed to the signs by means of a different 
arrangement, and by making the sign ascending (which is 
also called the horoscope) the first of the masculine signs. 
They also consider the first tropical sign to be that in which 
the Moon is posited, because she undergoes more frequent 
and rapid changes and variations than any other heavenly 
body ; and it is by a similar mode of reasoning that they 
establish the horoscope as the: first masculine sign, on 
account of its being more immediately under the Sun. 
Again, certain of these persons likewise allow the alternate 
arrangement of the signs; while there are, again, others who 
do not admit it; but, instead thereof, divide the whole 
zodiac into quadrants, and denominate those between the 
ascendant and the mid-heaven, and between the western 
angle and the lower heaven, oriental and masculine; and 
the other two quadrants, occidental and feminine. | 

There have also been other additional appellations bestow- 
ed on the signs, in consequence of their apparent formations 
and figures :—they have been called quadrupedal, terrestrial, 
' imperial, fruitful, and have received various other distin- 
guishing epithets of the same sort ;—but these distinctions 
seem too unimportant to be even enumerated here, since 
their origin is obvibus, and since, should they ever be 
thought serviceable towards the inference of future effects, 
they may be easily applied without the aid of further instruc- 


tion. 
Chapter XVI. 
Mutual Configurations of the Signs. 
THERE are certain familiarities or connections between 
different parts of the zodiac ; and the chief of these is that 
which exists between such parts as are configurated with 
each other. 


Chap. XVI.] —s- PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS, © 37 
This mutual configuration attaches to all parts diame- 
trically distant from each other, containing between them 
two right angles, or six signs, or a hundred and eighty 
degrees: it also exists in all parts at the triangular distance - 


from each other, containing between-them one right angle 
and a third, or four signs, or a hundred and twenty degrees ; 
also, in all parts: at the quadrate distance from each other, 


containing between them exactly one right angle, or three: 


signs, or ninety degrees ; and, also, in all parts at the hex- 
agonal distance from each other, containing between them 
two-thirds of a right angle, or two signs, or sixty degrees*. 





* Whalley, ip his note upon this chapter, seems to have been sur- 
prised that no mention is made here by Ptolemy of the conjunction ; 
but he overlooked the fact that the chapter treats only of parts of the 
zodiac configurated with eaeh other; and that it was not possible for 
Ptolemy to conceive how any part could be configurated with itself. 
It is, therefore, by no means wonderful that the conjunction is not 
inserted here along with the rest of the aspects ; although it is fre- 
quently adverted to in subsequent are: and its =e particu- 
larly described. 


38 ‘  PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOG. - [Book 1. 
These several distances are taken for the following, reasons : 
—the distance by diameter, however, is in itself sufficiently 
clear, and requires no further explanation ;—but, as to the 
rest, after the diametrical points have been connected by a 
straight line, AB; the space of the two right angles, con~ 
tained on the diameter, is then to be divided into aliquot 
parts of the two greatest denominations ; that is to say, into 
halves, AFC, CFB, and into thirds, AFD, DFE, EFB: 
there will then be provided for the third part (AD) a. super 
proportion (DC), equal to its own half; and for the half 
(AC) a super-proportion (CE), equal to its own third part ; 
.so that the division into two aliquot parts, AC, CB, will 
make the quartile distance AC; and the division into three 
aliquot parts, AD, DE, EB, will make the sextile distance 
AD, and the trinal distance AE. The respective super- 
proportions (on either side of the intermediate quartile AC, 
formed by the one right angle AFC), will also again make 
the quartile AC, (if there be added to the sextile, AD, the . 
super-proportion DC, equal to the half of the sextile), and 
the trine AE (if there be added to the quartile AC the super- 
proportion CE, equal to the third part of the quartile). 

Of these configurations, the trine and the sextile are each 
called harmonious, because they are constituted between 
signs of the same kind; being formed between either all 
feminine or al] masculine signs. The opposition and quar- | 
tile are considered to be discordant, because they are con- 


figurations made between signs not of the same kind, but of 
different natures and sexes*, 





* From the tenor of this chapter it was formerly doubted whether the 
author intended to admit in his theery only zodiacal aspects, and to ré= 
ject those which are called mundane; but Placidus has referred to the 
4th Chapter of the 8th Book of the Almagest (which will be found in 
the Appendix to this translation) to prove that Ptolemy distinctly 
taught two kinds of aspect ; one in the zodiac and one inthe werkd 


Chap, KVIII.] proumy’s TETBABIBLOS: 39 


Chapter XVII. 
Signs commanding and obeying. _ 

Any two signs configurated with each other at an equal 
distance from the same, or from either equinoctial point, are 
termed commanding and obeying, because the ascensional 
and descensional times of the one are equal to those of the 

other, and both describe equal parallels. 
The signs in the summer semicircle are commanding ; 
those in the winter semicircle, obeying: for, when the Sun 


is present in the former, he makes the day longer than the 


night ; and, when in the latter, he produces the contrary 

effect. 
Chapter XVII. | 

Signs beholding each other, and of equal Power. 


Any two signs, equally distant fram either tropical sign, 
are equal to each other in power; because the Sun, when 
present in one, makes day and night, and the divisions of 


time, respectively equal in duration to those which he pro- 


duces when present in the other, Such signs are also said 
to behold each other, as well for the foregoing reasons, as 
because each of them rises from one and the same part af 
the horizon, and sets in one and the same part*. 





Whalley quotes the opinion of Placidus, which he saysis farther con- 
firmed by the 12th Chapter of the Sd Book of this very treatise, where 
it is stated that the ascendant and the eleventh house are in sextile 
te each other; the ascendant and the mid-heaven in quartile ; the 
ascendant and the ninth house im trine; and the ascendant and the 
eecidenta! angie in opposition ; all which certainly seems to be appli- 
eabie to mundane aspects in partioular. 

* Whalley has a very lengthy note upon this and the preceding 
chapter, to shew that Ptolemy here speaks of zodiacal parallels, or 
parallejs of declination, and to point oyt the necessity of observ- 
ing a planet’s latitude, in order to ascertain its true parallels. It 


é 


40 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book f. 


Chapter XIX. 

Signs inconjunct. 
ALL signs, between which there does not exist any fami- 
liarity in any of the modes above specified, are inconjunct 
and separated. 

For instance, all signs are inconjunct which are neither 
commanding nor obeying, and not: beholding each other 
nor of equal power, as well as all signs which contain be- 
tween them the space of one sign only, or the spate of five 
signs, and which do not at all share in any of the four pre- 
scribed configurations: viz. the opposition, the trine, the 
quartile, and the sextile. All parts which are distant from 
each other in the space of one sign only are considered in- 
conjunct, because they are averted, as it were, from each - 
other; and because, although the said space between them 
may extend into two signs, the whole only contains an angle 
equal to that of one sign: all parts distant from each other 
in the space of five signs are also considered inconjunct, 
because they divide the whole circle into unequal parts ; 
whereas the ‘Spaces contained in the configurations above- 
mentioned, viz. the opposition, trine, quartile, and sextile, 
produce aliquot divisions*. 





is, however, to be recollected, that the parallels now alluded to are 
distinct from the mundane parallels, which are equal distances from the 
horizon or meridian, and are considered by Ptolemy in the 14th and 
15th Chapters of the $d Book of this work ;—although not under the 
express name of mundane parallels. 

*It has never been very clearly shewn how the followers of 
Ptolemy have reconciled the new [aspects called the semiquadrate, 
quintile, sesquiquadrate, biquintile, &c.] with the veto pronounced in 
this chapter. Kepler is said to have invented them, and they have 
been universally adopted ; even Placidus,,who has applied Ptolemy’s_ 
doctrine to practice better than any other writer, has availed himself 


- 


Chap. XX J PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. | 4l 


Chapter XX. 
Houses of the Planets. 


Toss stars which are denominated planstary orbs have 
particular femiliarity with certain places in ‘the zodiac, ‘by 





of theni*, and, if the nativities published by him are to be credited, 
be'has fully establisheil ‘their importance. | 

Salmon, in -his “ Hora ‘Mathematiox,” béforementioned, gives a 
long -dissertation (from p. 408 to-p.-444) onthe old Ptolemaic aspeots, 
illustrative of their foundation in-nature and in.matbematios; and, 
although his eonclusions are not quite satisfactorily drawn, some. of 
his arguments would seem appropriate, if he had but handled therh 
more fully and éxpertly ; particularly where ‘he says that the aspects 
are derived “from the aliquot parts of a circle, wherein ebserve that, 
“ although the.godiac:may have .many :more aliquot.parts than-these 
“ four (the sextile, quartile, trine, and opposition), yet those other 
“aliquot parts of the circle, or 860-degrees, wil] not make. an aliquot 
“ division of the signs also, which in this design was sought to. an- 
“-swer,‘as well in the number 12, as in the number 360.” ‘The pas- 
sage in-which he endeavours to:shew'that‘they are sathorined! by-theic. 

projection,:also deserves attention. 

All Salmon’s. arguments, however, in support of the old poueks 
aspects, militate against the new Keplerian ones; and so does the 
following extract from the “ Apology” of Sir Christopher Heydon: 
— For thus, amongst all ordinate planes that may be inscribed, 
“‘-there are two whose sides, joined together, have:pre-eminence ‘to 
“take up a semicircle,’ but orily the hexagon, quadrate, and equi- 
“lateral triangle, answering to the sextile, quartile, and trine irra- 
“ diated. The subtense, therefore, ‘of a sextile aspect consisteth of 
“‘ two signs, which, joined -to the -subtense of .a trine, composed of 
“.four, being regular and cquilateral, take up -six signs, which is a 
“ complete.semicircle. ‘In like :manner, the sides of a quadxate.in- 
“.seribed, subtendixg three signs, twice reckened, do occupy likewise 
“the mediety of.acirele. ‘ And.what those figures are: before saad to 
“‘ perform” (that is, to take up a semicigole) “either doubled or 


as x. 


* Except the semiquadrate, which'he has not at afl noticetl. 
ee 


‘42 _* * PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. { Book I. 


_ means of parts designated as their houses, and also by 
their triplicities, exaltations, terms, and so forth. 

The nature of their familiarity by houses is as follows : 

Cancer and Leo are the most northerly of all the twelve 
signs ; they approach nearer than the other signs to the 
zenith of this part of the earth, and thereby cause warmth 
and heat: they are consequently appropriated as houses for. 
the two principal and greater luminaries; Leo for the Sun, 
as being masculine; and Cancer for the Moon, as being 
feminine. It has-hence resulted, that the semicircle from 
Leo to Capricorn has been ordained solar, and the semicircle, 
from Aquarius to Cancer, lunar; in order that each planet 
might occupy one sign in each semicircle, and thus have 
one of its houses configurated with the Sun and the other 
with the Moon, conformably to the motions of its own 
sphere, and the peculiar properties of its nature. . 

Saturn, therefore, since he is cold and inimical to heat, 
moving also in a superior orbit most remote from the lumi- 
naries, occupies the signs opposite to Cancer and Leo: these 
are Aquarius and Capricorn ; and they are assigned to him 
in consideration of their cold and wintry nature; and be- 
cause the configuration by opposition does not co-operate 
towards the production of good*. 

Jupiter has a favourable temperament, and is situated 
beneath the sphere of Saturn; he therefore occupies the 
next two signs, Sagittarius and Pisces. These signs are 





“joined together, may also be truly ascribed unto the opposite as- 
“ pect by itself; for that the diametral line, which passeth from the 
“‘ place of conjunction to the opposite point, divideth a circle into 
“‘ two equal parts: the like whereof cannot be found in any other 
“ inscripts; for example, the side ofa regular pentagon” (the quintile) 
. “ subtendeth 72 degrees, of an oetagon’” (the semiquadrate) “ but 45; 
“the remainders of which ares, viz. 108 and 135 degrees, are not sub- 
“ tended by the sides of any ordinate figure.” 

* Saturn being also malefic in his nature. 


/ 


Chap. XXI.]  PTOLEMY’sS TETRABIBLOS. AB 


airy and fruitful, in consequence of their trinal distance from 
the houses of the Juminaries, which distance harmonizes 
with the operation of good. 

Mars is dry in nature, and beneath the sphere of J upitef : 
he takes the next two signs, of a nature similar to his own, 
viz. Aries and Scorpio, whose relative distances from. the 
houses of the luminaries are injurious and discordant. 

"Venus, possessing a favourable temperament, and placed 
berieath the sphere of Mars, takes the next two signs, Taurus’ 
and Libra. These are of a fruitful nature, and preserve 


‘harmony by the sextile distance ; and this planet is never- 


more than two sign’ distant from the Sun. 

Mercury never has greater distance from the Sun than’ 
the space of one sign, and is-beneath all the other planets : 
hence he is nearest to both luminaries, and the remaining 
two signs, Gemini and Virgo, are allotted to him*. 


Chapter XXI. 
The Triplicities. 


' Tue familiarity existing by triplicity arises in the follow- 


ing mode : 

The triplicity preserves accordance with an equilateral 
triangle, and the whole zodiacal orbit is defined by three 
circles, viz. that of the equinox, and those of the two 


‘ tropics ; the twelve signs are, therefore, distributed among 


four equilateral triangles. 





* The planets, having two houses, are said to be more powerful in 
one by day and in the other by night: thus, 
Saturn’s day house is Aquarius, his night house Capricorn 
Jupiters —— Sagittarius = —— Pisces 


Mars’s — Ares — Scorpio 
Venusss -—— Taurus — Libra 
Mercury’s —— Gemini _—— Virgo. 


The above is from Whalley; but the same disposition is to be found 
in all modern astrological writers. 


¢¢ . ? ae: 


e 


4A. PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [ Book L. 


The first triangle, or triplicity, is formed. by three mag- 
culine signs, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, having the Sun, 
Jupiter, and Mars, as lords by house. Mars, however, 
being contrary in condition to the solar influence, this tri- 
plicity receives, as its lords, only Jupiter and the Sun. By 
day, therefore, the Sun claims the principal co-regency of 
it, and Jupiter by night. Aries is on the equinoctial circle, 
Leo on the summer, and Sagittarius on the winter circle. 
This triplicity is principally northern, owing to the concur-. 
rent dominion of Jupiter, who is fruitful and airy, aud ex- 
pressly connected with winds proceeding from the north ; it 
is, however, also north-west, ia consequence of being, in 
some degree, combined with the west by means of the house ” 
of Mars, who introduces western breezes and the feminine 
qualities of that quarter, in consequence of his lunar con- 
drtion*, 

The second triplicity, formed by Taurus, Virgo, and Ca- 
pricorn, is allotted to the dommes of the Moon and Venus, 
since it consists of feminine signs. The Moon rules it by 
night, and Venus by day. Taurus is on the summer circle, 
Virgo: on the equinoctial, and. Capricer: on the winter. 
This triplicity is southern, in consequence of the dowririon 
_ Of Verus, whose warm and moist influence produces south 
winds : it, however, additionally receives a mixture of the ’ 
east, by means of Saturn; for, as Capricorn is the house 
of that planet, and an eastern sign, Saturn becomes effec- 
tive of winds from that quarter, and furnishes this triplicity 
with a mixture of the east, with which quarter he is further 
connected hy means of his solar conditiont. 

The third triplicity is composed of Gemini, Libra, and 
Aquarius, maseuline signs, It holds connection with Saturn 





*The “lunar condition” here spoken of refers to the position of 
Aries (Mars’s house) in the lunar semicircle. ° 
t Capricorn being in the solar semicircle. 


Chap. XXI.]  PTQLEMY’sS TETBABIBLOS. a 


and Mercury. by -containing their houses, and is therefore 
attributed.to them, and-not to Mars, to which planet. it 
bears no relation. Saturn rules it by day, owing to his 
condition*, and Mercury by night. Gemini is om the 
summer circle, Libra on. the equinoctial, and Aquarius an 
the winter. This triplicity is: principally eastern, by the 
influence of Saturn; but it becomes north-east by receiving 
also a mixture of the north from the condition-of Jupiter, 
- with which pane Saturn bas, in this respect, a diasnal 
familiarity+. 

The fourth triplicity, formed by Cancer, Scorpio, and 
Pisces, is left to the remaining planet, Mars, who has right 
in it by means of his house, Scorpio. But, as. the signa 
which compose this triplicity are feminine, the Maon by 
night and Venus by day, through their feminine. conditian, 
govern it,’ together with Mars. Cancer is on the summer 
circle, Scorpio on the winter, and Pisces.on the equinoctial. 
This triplicity is western, in consequence of the government 
of the Moon and Mars; but it is also blended with the 
south hy the joint dominion of Venus, and therefore becomes 


south-west. 
Chapter XXII. 


Exaliations. 


Tuat which is termed the exaltation of the planets is cons 
sidered by the following rules: 

The Sun on his entrance into Aries is then passing into. 
the higher and more northern semicircle; but, on his en- 
trance into Libra, into the more southern and lower one: 
his exaltation, therefore, is determined to be in Aries, as, 





* Tho reason for making Saturn diurnal lord of this Py may 
be Shand. in Chap. vii. 
t This familiarity seemsa to arise from the sextile aspect hateeen 


Aquarius, the diurnal house of Saturn, and Seen the diurnal 
house of Jupiter. - 


46 -PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, {Book I. 
when present in that sign, he begins to lengthen the days, . 
and the influence of his heating nature increases at the same 
time. His fall is placed in Libra, for the converse reasons. 
Saturn on the contrary, in order to preserve his station 
opposite to the Sun, in this respect, as well as in regard to 
their respective houses, obtains his exaltation in Libra, and 
his fall in Aries: since, in all cases, the increase of heat 
must be attended by a diminution of cold, and the increase 
of cold by a diminution of heat. | 
The Moon, again, after conjunction with the Sun in - 
Aries, the seat of his exaltation, makes her first appearance, 
and begins to augment her light in Taurus, the first sign of 
her own triplicity, which is consequently ascribed to be her 
exaltation; while Scorpio, the opposite sign, is her fall. 
Jupiter, since he is efficacious in exciting fruitful breezes 
from the north, and since he becomes most northerly, and 
augments his peculiar influence when in Cancer, accordingly 
obtains his exaltation in that sign, and his fall in Capricorn. 
Mars possesses a fiery nature, which receives its greatest 
intensity in Capricorn, in which sign this planet becomes 
most southerly ; his exaltation is therefore placed in Capri- 
corn, in opposition to that of Jupiter, and his fall in Can- 
cer. : 
~ Venus is of a moist nature, and becomes chiefly moist 
when in Pisces. Under that sign a dampness begins to be 
perceptible in the atmosphere, and Venus, from being in — 
that sign, derives an augmentation of her own proper in- 
fluence: her exaltation is consequently placed therein, and 
her fall in Virgo. | ) 
Mercury is of a nature opposite to that of Venus, and is 
more dry: in opposition to her, therefore, he takes his ex- 
altation in Virgo, in which sign the autumnal dryness makes 
its first appearanee; and he receives his fall in Pisces. - 


Chap. XXUI.) propemy’s TETRABIBLOS. 47 


Ghapter XXIII. 
The Disposition of the Terms *. 


THERE are two methods of disposing the terms of the pla- 
nets, in reference to the dominion of the triplicities ; one is 
/Egyptian, the other Chaldaic. 

But the Egyptian method preserves no regular distribu- 
tion, neither in point of successive order nor in point of 
quantity. 

In point of order it is defective, since it, in some in- 
stances, allots the first degrees of a sign to the lord of the 
house, in others to the Jord of the triplicity, and in others 
again to the lord of the exaltation. By selecting examples this 
failure in order will easily be seen ; for instance, if the order 
were regulated by the government of houses, for what reason 
should Saturn take the first degrees in Libra, since that sign is 
the house of Venus’? orwhy should Jupiter take them in Aries, 
which is the house of Mars? If the government of tripli- 
cities were followed, for what reason should Mercury take 
the first degrees in Capricorn, which is in the triplicity ruled 
_ by Venus? If the government by exaltations, why should 

Mars take the first degrees in Cancer? that sign being the 
exaltation of Jupiter. And if the order were regulated 
even by considering the planet which possesses most of 





* In reference to the terms of the planets, Placidus has these 
words (according to Cooper's translation): ‘ The dignity of the 
“ planets in the signs and their parts, which are called the bounds 
“ and terminations,” (quasi, terms) “ have a real and natural foun- 
“ dation; to wit, the powerful aspect or proportional influxes to the 
‘¢ moveable points in which the stars begin to produce the primary 
“‘ qualities. So that, according to those things we have explained 
“< in the philosophy of the heavens, these are found to agree so well 
‘ with the Egyptian boundaries,” (terms) “ that they are highly de- 
“ serving of admiration.” — 


48 : PPOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book 1. 
these dignities in the sign, for what reason should Mercury 
take the first degrees in frquarius, n which sign he rules 
only by triplicity, and why not Saturn, who has govern- 
ment in it by house, as well as by triplicity ? or why in 
short should Mercury, who does not ‘possess any kind of 


domiriion ‘in ‘Capricorn, Teceive the first degrees in that sign . 


also? The same want of order ts abundantly evident in the 
rest of ‘the distribution. 

- ‘An ‘equal ‘irregularity exists in the respective quantities of 
degrees allotted by the ASgyptians to the several terms of 
the planets. For it‘is‘by no means a proper nor suffictent 
demonstration ‘of accuracy that the aggregate sum of -all 
the nutifbers of every single planet amounts to the precise 
totdl requiring to ‘be divided ito portions of time * ; since, 
even if it be admitted ‘that this total, collected from every 
single star, is correctly asserted by the Agyptians, .it may 
still be objected that ‘the ‘same totdl, so collected ‘by them, 
may‘be found in many other ways ‘by ‘interchanging the 
numbers in‘a‘sign. There are persons also who contend 
that ‘in every Tatitude the same space of time ‘is occupied in 
ascension by every star; this, however, is manifestly wrong : 
for, ‘1 ‘in the first place, these persons are guided by the vulgar 
opinion of the-plane heights of ascension, which is totally 
foreign to truth, and according to which, mthe parallel of 
Lower #Egypt, the signs of Virgo and Libra would ascend 
each in thirty-eight degrees and a third +, and Leo and 
Scorpio each tn thirty-five ‘degrees:; when it is, on the :eon- 
trary, shewn by the Tables'{, that'the:latter two signs-occupy 


—— 


‘* This ‘total is ‘the 360 degrees of the-zodiac, ‘requiring'to be di- 
vided according ‘to correspondent ‘portions of the equator; ‘by lai 
all time is reckoned. 

t The degrees here mentioned are degrees of the equator. 

‘TSee, in the Appentitx, an extract from these tables; the whole of 
which are to he found in the Almagest. 


_f¢ 


Chap. XXIIT.] PTOLEMY’S TETRAMIBLOS. = 49 


_ in their several ascensions more than thirty-five degrees 
each, but Virgo and Libra less. It should further be ob- 
served, that those who support this opinion seem(by so doing) 
- not only to dispute the quantity of the terms most generally 
received, but to be driven also to the necessity of falsifying 
many points; since (as it is indispensable to keep to the 
same total amount of all the terms together) they make use 
of parts of degrees ; but evert that contrivance does rrot ¢ti- 
able them to reach the true point. 
_. The old terms, admitted by many persons on the authority 
of former tradition, ate 49 follow : 


The Terms according to the Agyptians. 


Seer | Rees _ Pisces 
7 (Ven) 12|12 





Thus, by the Egyptian distribution, it appears that the 
total numbers of the degrees for each planet, added together, 
make 360 :—viz. for Saturn 57, Jupiter 79, Mars 66, 

Venus 82, and Mercury 76, 
H \ 


50 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. { Book I. 

The method of the Chaldzeans contains a certain simpli- 
city of drrangement as to quantity, and preserves an order 
of succession rather more conformable to the dominion of 
the triplicities. It is, nevertheless, highly imperfect, as may 
be easily discovered even without being pointed out: for in 
the first triplicity, (which-the Chaldeans also attribute to 
the same signs; viz. Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius,) Jupiter, 
the lord of the triplicity, takes the first degrees; Venus, 
who rules the next triplicity, follows him; after her, in suc- 
cession, are Saturn and Mercury, the lords of the triplicity 
of Gemini; and lastly Mars, lord of the remaining triplicity. 
In the second triplicity, (also allotted to the same signs, viz. 
Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn) Venus stands first; next to 
her, Saturn and Mercury; after them Mars, and Jupiter 
last. In the other two triplicities a similar order of suc- 
cession 1s closely followed ; and with respect to the third 
triplicity, which is ascribed to two lords, viz. to Saturn and 
Mercury, Saturn is placed first in order by day and Mercury 
by night. . 

The quantity of degrees allotted to each planet is also 
simply regulated in the Chaldaic method; it diminishes in 
gradation from the quantity given to the planet first in 
order, so that each successive planet takes one degree less 
than that which preceded it. Thus the first planet takes 
eight degrees, the second seven, the third six, the fourth 
five, and the fifth four. By this arrangement the degrees of 
Saturn amount by day to 78, and by night to 66; the de- 
grees of Jupiter to 72, of Mars to 69, of Venus to 75, and 
of Mercury by day to 66, and by night to 78—the whole 
amounting to 360. 

Of these two distributions of the terms, that of the 
_ Egyptians seems more to be relied on than the ‘other ; 
since it has been handed down and recommended in the 
writings of the Egyptian authors, and also because the 
degrees of the terms, in nativities. rectified by tem as ex- 


v 


Chap. XXIV.] proLEMy’s TETRABIBLOS. 661 
amples, are universally in accordance with this distribution ; 
while, on the other hand, neither the order nor the number 
of the Chaldaic method has ever been recorded or explained 
by any writer—not even by the writers of that very nation : 
the accuracy of that method is consequently doubtful, and 
“its irregularity as.to the order of placing the planets is 
widely open to censure. 

There 1s, however, an antient writing which has fallen 


into the author’s possession, and which gives a rational 


and consistent account of the nature of the terms; of the 
order in which they are to be taken, and of the quantity 
belonging to each. It will be found in the subsequent 
chapter. — 


Chapter XXIV. | 


The Terms according to Ptolemy. 


In arranging the order in which the planets take their terms 
in each sign, their exaltations, triplicities, and houses, are 


taken. into consideration; and whatever planet, whether. 


benefic or malefic, may possess two rights of dominion in one 
and the same sign, such planet is universally placed first in 
order in that sign. In other cases, however, where it does 
not happen that a malefic possesses two rights of dominion 
in the sign, it is always placed last. 

The lord .of the exaltation is placed first; then the Jord 
of the triplicity ; and then the lord of the house; im regu- 
lar succession, according to the series of the signs: but it 
must again be remembered that any planet, having two rights 
of dominion in the same sign, takes precedence, as before 


mentioned, of those having only one. In Cancer and ~ 


Leo, however, the malefics occupy the first degrees; as 
those signs are the houses of the Moon and the Sun, which 
take no terms; and the malefics being found to have 


greater potency in those signs therefore take precedence in. 


52 ,  PTOLEMY’S TRTRABIBLOS. [Book I. 


them. Mars, consequently, receives the first degrees in 
Cancer, and Saturm in Leo, by which arrangement a proper © 
order is preserved *. 

The respective quantities of degrees for the several 
terms is thus determined: viz. when there is no planet 
found to be lord by two rights in the same sign, or in the 
two signs next following, each of the benefics, Jupiter and 
Venus, takes seven degrees; the malefics, Saturn and Mars, 

take five degrees each ; and Mercury, being of common in- 
~ fluence, takes six degrees 3 thus completing the whole thirty- 
Since, however, there are some cases in which a planet has 
always a double right—{for Venus obtains the sole govern- 
ment of Taurus and Pisces, as the Moon does.not share in 
the terms)—it is to be observed that when such double right, 
(whether it exist in the same sign or in the signs next fol- 
lowing as far as may complete a quadrant,) may be pos- 
sessed by any planet, that planet receives in addition one 
degree. The planets thus entitled were distinguished by 
points in the antient writing above mentioned. And the 
degree, added to the quantity of the planet which exercises 
a double right, is subtracted from those of single right ; 
most generally from Saturn and Jupiter, in consequence of 
their slower motion. 


These terms are detailed in the following table :— 





' * The cause of this disposition is that Cancer, the house of the 
Moon, partakes of moisture, and counteracts Mars’s dryness; while 
Leo, the Sun’s house, is hot, and counteracts Saturn’s cold,—Vide 
Chap. iv, and conclusion of Chap. vii of this Book. 

it may further be observed, that Jupiter’s right, by triplicity, to the 
first degrees in Leo, is of course surrendered to Saturn, on the prin- 


ciple that the malefics have greatcr potency in the houses of the 
luminaries, 


Chap. XXV.] PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. 53 


ia } —=— |= 


Aes 6 - Ven.] 6/14]Mer.] 6 |12 
}Jup.| 7}1 


Mercury 
Jupiter 





The Places and Degrees of every Planet. 
Tue signs have been subdivided by some persons into parts: 
still more minute, which have been named places and degrees 
of dominion. Thus the twelfth part of a sign, or two de- 
grees and a half, has been called a place, and the dominion 
of it given to the signs next succeeding. Other persons 
again, pursuing various modes of arrangement, attribute to 
each planet certain degrees, as being aboriginally connected 
with jt, in a. manner somewhat similar to the Chaldaic -ar- 
rangement of the terms. But all these imaginary attributes 
‘cannot be herein detailed, for they receive no confirmation 
from nature, are not capable of being rationally demonstrat- 
ed, and are, in fact, merely the offspring of scientific vanity. 


54 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. {Book I. 


The following observation, however, deserves attention, 
and must not be omitted. 

The beginnings of the signs, and likewise those of the 
terms, are to be taken from the equinoctial and tropical points. 
This rule is not only clearly stated by writers on the subject, 
but is also especially evident by the demonstration constantly | 
afforded, that their natures, influences, and familiarities, have 
no other origin than’ from the tropics and equinoxes, as has 
been already plainly shewn*. And, if other beginnings 
were allowed, it would either be necessary to exclude the 
natures of the signs from the theqry of prognostication, or 
impossible to avoid error in then retaining “nd making use 
of them; as the regularity of their spaces and distances, 


upon which their influence depends, would then be invaded __ 


and broken in upon. 


Chapter XXVI. 
Faces, Chariots, and other similar Attributes of the Planets. 
THE familiarities existing between the planets and the signs 
are such as have been already particularized. 

There are also, however, further peculiarities ascribed to 
the planets. Each is said to be in its proper face, when the 
aspect it holds to the Sun, or Moon, is similar to that which 
its own house bears to their houses: for example, Venus is 
in her proper face when making a sextile aspect to either lu- 
minary, provided she be occidental to the Sun, but oriental 
to the Moon, aereeany to the primary arrangement of her 
houses f. : 

Each planet is also said to be in its proper chariot, or 
throne, or otherwise triumphantly situated, when it holds 





* Vide Chapters xii and xiv of this Book. ; 

+ Vide Chapter xx. It of course follows that Saturn is in bis pro-' 
per face when he is five signs, or in quintile, after the Sun er befvre - 
the Moon; that Jupiter is so when in trine; Mars when in quartile ; 
Venus when in sextile; and Mercury when only one sign, (or, in 
modern phrase, in semi-sextile,) afte? the Sun or before the Moon. 


Chap. XXVI.] ProLeMy s TETRABIBLOS, | 55 


eee with the place which it actually occupies by two, 
or more, of the prescribed modes of connection: for when 
it is so circumstanced, its influence and energy .are specially 
augmented by the familiarity it thus holds with the sign 
which encompasses it, and which 1s similar in influence and 
co-operates with it. 

Lastly, each planet, (although it may possess no familia= 


rity with the sign encompassing it) is said to rejoice, when . 


any connection subsists between itself and other stars of the 
same condition; as, notwithstanding the distance between 
them, a certain sympathy and communication of influence 
is derived from their mutual resemblance. In the same 
manner, again, when a planet occupies a place adverse and 
dissimilar in condition to itself, much of its influence 1s 
dissipated and lost; in consequence of the interposition and 
admixture of the other different influence, arising out of the 
dissimilar temperament. of the sign by which it is encom- 


passed. 
Chapter XXVII. 
Application, Separation, and other Faculties. 
In all cases when the distances between planets or Jumina- 
ries are but trifling *, the planet which precedes is said to 
apply to tuat which follows; and that which follows to be 
‘separating from that which precedes ¢. The same rule ab- 


* This has been understood to mean, when the planets or lumina- 
ries are within each gther’s orbs; Saturn’s orb being 10 degrees, Ju- 
piter’ 8 12, Mars’s 7 degrees 30 minutes, the Sun’s 17 degrees, Ve- 


nus’s 8, Mercury’s 7 degrees 30 ee and the Moon’s 12 degrees 
30 minutes. 


+ Astrologers generally agree, that the inferior planets always apply — 


to thé'superior, but the superior never to the inferior, except when 
the inferior be retrograde. In the present instanee it seems most 
probable that the author means the planet which is more occidental, 
by “ the planet which. precedes.” He often uses “ precedent” as 
equivalent to “oceidental” in regard to the daily revolution of the hea- 
vens: and thus a planet in the first degree of Aries would precede, and 
be more occidental than. one j in the sixth eree of Aries, to which 
latter it would, by the regular planetary motion, be applying. 


\ 


56 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. . [Book }. 


tains both in respect to bodily conjunction and to any other 
of the aspects before described ; except that, in the applica~ 
tion ‘and separation of the bodily conjunction, it is also 
essential to observe the actual latitudes of the bodies, in 
order ‘to receive and consider only such a transit as may be 
. made in the same parts of the zodiac *. But in the appli- 
cation and separation of. aspects merely, the same attention 
is not requisite, since all the rays are uniformly converged 
into one focus, that is to say, into the angle of the earth f, 
and meet there alike from every quarter. 

It appears, therefore, by the whole of what has been already 
delivered, that the effective influence of: the stars must be 
considered as arising not only from their own peculiar na- 
tures and properties, but also from the quality of the sur- 
rounding signs, and from configuration with the Sun. and 
the angles; all which has been pointed out. The influence 
of each planet, however, is strengthened chiefly when it may 
be oriental, swift and direct in its proper course and motion 
—for it has then its greatest power: but, on the other hand, 
_- It loses strength when occidental and slow in motion or re- 
trograde 5 as-it then acts with smaller effect {. Its influence 


* On this, Whalley says that “ the less the difference of latitude. 
* of the planets in conjunction, the more powerful will be the im- 
“* fluence: for if two planets in conjunction have each considerable 
“latitude of different denomination, the influence of such conjunc- 
** tion will be much lessened.” : 

f Tour’ net ew: ro arvrpoy ths yng. The precise meaning of the word xerrpey 
is “ centre,” rather than “angle ;” but Ptolemy uses it throughout 
this work, in speaking of the four angles of heaven, and I con- 
ceive he uses it here to signify an angle at, or on, the earth. The fol- 
lowing definition of an aspect, by Kepler, strengthens my opinion : 
* An aspect is an angle formed on the earth, by the luminous rays 
.€ of two planets; efficacious in stimulating sublunary nature.” 

t Placidus (Cooper’s translation) says that “the three superiors 
* are supposed to be stronger, if they are found to be matutine, or 
eastern, from the Sun; the three inferiors, vespertine, or western; 
* for then they have ¢ tae dactee of light, in which consists 
¢ their virtual ir‘ alled oriental ; but occi- 





Chap. KXVII.] PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. 57 


_also receives accession or diminufion, from its position with 
regard to the horizon; as, if it be situated in the mid-hea- 
ven, or succedent to the mid-heaven, it is especially strong; 
likewise, if it be on the actual horizon, or succedent to the 
horizon, it is also powerful ;—particularly if in the east- 
ern quarter. Should it, however, be below the earth, and 
configurated with the ascendant, either from the lower hea- 
ven, or from any other part below the earth, its influence 
then becomes more languid ; but if, when below the earth, 
* it holds no such configuration, it is entirely deprived of effi- 
bias tT. 





‘‘ dental if otherwise. Every one knows how largely, yet to.ng pur~ 
“* pose, authors have treated of the orientality of the planets.” 
Moxon’s Mathematical Dictionary has the following words on the — 
same ‘subject: “ Now the three superior planets are strongest, being 
“ oriental and matutine; but the three inferior when .they are 
‘‘ occidental and vespertine. The reason is, because the first in tha 
“ first case, but the last in the second, do then descend tothe lowest 
‘¢ part of their orbit, are increased in light, and approaching nearer 
“the earth; and so on the contrary, the inferiors matutine, the 
“ superiors vespertine are weakened.” 
t Ina note on the 6th Chapter of this Book, Whalley says that, 
“6 accorfling to Ptolemy, suchas are between the ascendant and mid- 
‘* heaven obtain the first place of strength, and are said to bein their 
“ oriental orientality: but, between the western horizon and the 
“¢ lower heaven, in their occidental orientality, which is the second 
.“ place of strength : between the lower heaven and the ascendant, 
“in their oriental oceijlentality, the first degree of weakness; and 
‘“ hetwoen the mid-heaven and western horizon, in their oceiden- — 
“ tal occidentality, the weakest place of all.” This is all very pretty 
jargon, but certainly not “according to Ptolemy,” who. distinctly, 
s, on the contrary, that if a planet “is an the actual horizon, or 
ceteht to “the ‘horizon, it is also powerful, and particularly if 
« in the eastern quarter.” “The last member of this sentence, as well 
fistiee ,conclasion of this 27th Chapter, shows that Ptolemy did not 
considersa situation Setweqp the mid-heaven and western horizon 
tobe “ the weakest place of all.” 


| e - 


= 


58 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book II. 


BOOK. THE SECOND. 


Chapter I. 


General Division of the Subject. 

THE great and leading points, requiring to be attended to 
‘ as a necessary means of introduction to the consideration of 
particular predictions, having been succinctly defined, the 
further parts of the subject, comprehending every thing 
which may tend to facilitate prediction, and render it com- 
" plete, shall now be duly proceeded in ; and, at the same time, 
care shall be taken to confine the whole doctrine within the 
limits of natural reason. 

: The foreknowledge to be acquired by means of Astro- 
nomy is to be regarded in two great and principal divisions. 
The first, which may be properly called General, or Univer- 
sal, concerns entire nations, countries, or cities; and the - 
second,. denominated Particular, or Genethliacal, relates to 
men individually. 

In considering these respective divisions, it seems proper 
to give priority to that which-has the more general applica- 
tion and influence: because, in the first place, general events 
are produced by causes greater and more compulsatory than 
the causes of particular events; secondly, because natures 
of more extended potency must invariably controul those 
which are more limited inaction ; and, thirdly, because pae- 
ticular events, or individual affections, are comprehended in 
those of general influence*. It is therefore especially nec®s- 
* Vide Chap. iii, Book J, pp. 13-14. 

\ _* 


Chap. I.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 59 


sary, in desiring to investigate particular events, to treat 
first of those which are general. 

Again, general events are subdivided according to their ope- 
ration upon entire countries, ang upon certain cities or dis- 
tricts: one subdivision being regarded: as affecting: entire 
countries, and the other certain cities or districts only.. 
They are also separately considered according to the causes 
by which they are produced ; war, pestilence, famine, earth- 
quakes, inundations, and other similar visitations being de- 
pendent on such greater and more important causes, as arise 
only after considerable periods ; while slighter causes, arising 
more frequently, have reference only to the revolution of the 
seasons ; their greater or less variation in cold and heat; 
the severity or mildness of the weather; the occasional 
abundance or scarcity of provisions; and other like occur- 
rences, 

Hence the consideration of those events which concern 
whole countries, and are dependent on the greater causes, 
(since it has a more extended scope than the other, which | 
attaches only to certain cities, or districts, and is subject ta 
slighter causes) takes precedence. And, for its due investi- 
gation, two essential points are to be attended to: the. first 
is, the appropriate familiarity of the zodiacal signs and the 
fixed stars with the several regions which may be concerned 5 
and the second comprises the indications occasionally arising 
in those parts of the heavens where such familiarity. is 
found: for instance, the eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and ~ 
such transits as may be made by the planets, when ees 
and jn their respective stations. 

The nature of the sympathy between these things must 
however be explained first ; and a brief description will: 
therefore be given of the chief peculiarities observable in 
whole nations ; in regard to their manners and customs, as 
well as to their bodily formation and temperament ; consi- 
dered agreeably to their familiarity with those stars and signs 


60 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS; [ Book II. 


whence the natural cause of their a duly pro- 
ceeds. 


_ Chaper I. 7 
Peculiarities observable Threughout every entire Climate. 


-THE peculiarities of all nations are distinguished: according 
to ‘entire parallels and entire angles, and’ by their situation 
with regard to the Sun and the Ecliptic. 3 

The climate which we inhabit is. situated m one of the 
Northern Quadrants: but other nations, which lie onder 
more southern paraliels, that is to say, in the space between 
the equinoctial line and the summer tropic, havé-the Sun 
ia their zenith, and are continually scorched by it. They 
a¥e consequently black in complexion, and have thick and 
curled hair. They are, moreover, ugly in person, of con- 
tracted stature, hot in disposition, and fierce in manners, mm 
vonséquerice of the incessant heats to which they are’ ex- 
- posed; and they are called by the common name of Atthio- 
pians. But the human race does not alone afford eviderice 
of the violent heat in these regions; it is shown also by alfl 
other animals and by the state of the surrounding atmo- 
sphere. 

The natives of those countries which lie under the more 
Yemote northern parallels, (that is to say, under theArctic 
civele and beyond it*) have their zenith far distant from the 
zodiae and the Sun’s heat. Their constitutions, therefore, 
abound in cold, and are also highly imbued with moisture, 
- which ts tn itself a most nutritive quality, and, in these fati- 
tudes, is not exhausted by heat: hence they are fair in com- 
plexion, with straight hair, of large bodies and full stature. 
They are cold in disposition, and wild in manners, owing to 
the constant cold. The state of the surrounding atmo-. 





* “Under the Bears,” im the Greck. 


Chap. II.] YTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 61 


‘sphere and of animals and plants, corresponds with that of 
men; who are here designated by. the general name of 
Scythians. 

The.nations situated between the sammer tropic and the 
arctic circle, having the meridian Sun neither in their zenith. 
nor yet far remote from it, enjoy a well-temperated atmosphere, 
This favourable temperature, however, still undergoes variation, 
and changes alternately from heat to cold; but the variation 
" is never vast nor violent. The people who enjoy this kindly 
‘ atmosphere are consequently of proportionate stature and 

complexion, and of good natural disposition : they liye not 
in a state of dispersion, but dwell together in societies, and 
are civilized in their habits. Among the nations compre- 
hended in this division, those verging towards the ‘south 
are more industrious and ingenious than the others, and 
more adapted to the sciences: and these qualifications-are - 
engendered in them by the vicinity of the zodiac to their 
zenith, and by the familiarity thus subsisting between them 
and the planets moving in the zodiac, which familiarity gives 
activity and an intellectual impulse to their minds. Again, 
the natives of those countries which lie towards the east 
excel in courage, acting bohily and openly under all cir- 
cumstances; for in all their characteristics they. are princi- 
pally conformed to the Sun’s nature, which is oriental, diur- 
nal, masculine and dexter :—{and ig is plainly apparent that 
the dexter parts of all animals are much stronger than others) : 

—hence results the greater courage of the inhabitants of the 

East. And as the Moon, on her first appearance after con- 
juaction, is always seen in the West, the western parts are 
_ therefore lunar, and consequently feminine and sinister ; 
whence it follows that the inhabitants of the west are milder, 
maore effemmate and reserved. 

Thus, in all countries, certain ni respective peculiarities exist 
In regard to manners, customs and laws; and in each it is 
found that some portion of the inhabitants differs partially 


62 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS; Book I, 


and individually from the usual habits and condition of their 
race. These variations arise-similarly to the variations per- 
ceptible in the condition of the atmosphere; ds, in all 
countries, the general state of whose atmosphere may be 
either hot, or cold, or temperate, certain districts are found to 
possess a particular temperature of their own, and to be 
more or less hot, or cold, by being more or Jess elevated than 
the general face of the country. So, likewise, certain 
people become navigators owing to their proximity tothe sea, 
while others are equestrian, because their country is a 
plain ; and others, again, become domesticated oy the fertility 
of their soil. 

And thus, in each particular climate, certain peculiar 
qualities are to be found, arising from the natural familiarity 
which it holds with the stars and the twelve signs. And 
although these qualities do not pervade it, in such a manner 
as to be necessarily exhibited by every individual native, yet 
they are so far generally distributed as to be of much utility 
in investigating particular events ; and it is highly important _ 
to take at least a brief notice of them. 


Chapter ‘I. 


The paaaty of the Regions of the Earth with the Triplici- 

. | ties and the Planets. 
It has been already stated that there are four triplicities 
distinguishable in the zodiac. The first, composed of Aries, 
Leo, and Sagittarius, is the north-west triplicity; and Ju-: 
piter has chief dominion over it on behalf of its northern 
proportion; but Mars also rules with him in reference to 
the west. The second, consisting of Taurus, Virgo, and 
Capricorn, is the south-east; and in this triplicity Venus: 
bears chief rule, in consequence of the southern proportion ; 
but Saturn also governs with her in consideration of the 
east. The third, composed of Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, | 
is north-east; and Saturn is here the principal lord, in con- 


| Chap. III.] = PToLEMy’s TETRABIBLOS. 63 


sequence of the eastern proportion; Jupiter, however, go- 
~ verns with him in reference to the north. The fourth tri- 
plicity is constituted of Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, and is 
south-west ; it owns Mars as its principal ruler, in consider- 
ation of its western proportion ; and, on behalf of the south, 
it is also governed by Venus. 

The four triplicities being thus established, the whole in- 
habited earth is accordingly divided into four parts, agrec- 
ing with the number of the triplicities, It is divided latitudi- 
nally by the line of the Mediterranean Sea, from the Straits 
of Hercules to the Issican Gulph, continued onwards 
through the mountainous ridge extending towards the east ; 
and by this latitudinal division its southern and northern 
parts are defined. Its longitudinal division is made by the 
line of the Arabian Gulph, the AZgean Sga, Pontus, and the 
lake Meeotis ; and by this line are ne its eastern and 
western parts. 

- The four quadrants of. the earth, thus agreeing in num- 
ber with the four triplicities, one is situated in the north- 
west of the entire earth, and contains Celto-galatia; or, as 
it is commonly called, Europe. Opposed to this quadrant 
lies that of the south-east, towards Eastern Ethiopia ; it is 
called the southern part of Asia Magna. Another quadrant 
of the entire earth is in the north-east, about Scythia, and is 
called the northern part of Asia.Magna. To this 1s opposed 
the quadrant of the south-west, which lies about Western 
AEtmopia, and is known by the general nathe of Libya. 

Each of these quadrants contains certain parts, which, in 
comparison with its other parts, lie more contiguous to the 
middle of the earth; and these parts, in respect of the 
quadrant to which they belong, -have a situation opposite to 
the rest of that quadrant, in the same manner as that quad- 
rant itself is situated in regard to the rest of the earth. . For 
instance, in the quadrant of Europe, which is situated on 
the north-west of the whole earth, those parts of it which lie 


\ a 


64 PTOLEMY’S ‘TETRABIBLOS. | EBook IT. 


towards the middle of the earth, and near the angles of the 
other quadrants, are manifestly situated in the south-east of 
that quadrant. The like rule obtains in regard to the other 
quadrants. And hence it is evident that each quadrant is 
in familiarity with two oppositely-placed triplicities, its 
whole extent being adapted to the one triplicity which 
governs it as an entire quadrant; but its particular parts, 
situated about the middle of the earth, and lying, as regards 
the rest of the quadrant, in a direction contrary: to that 
assigned to the whole quadrant altogether, being adapted to 
the other triplicity which rules the particular quadrant lying 
apposite to it, The planets exercising dominion in both 
these triplicities also hold familiarity with these particular 
_ parts; but, with the other more remote parts of any quadrant, 
only those planets hold familiarity, which rule in the single 
triplicity to which the whole quadrant is allotted. With the 
said particular parts about the middle of the earth, Mercury 
also, as well as the other planets in dominion, bears fami- 
liarity, in consideration of his mediative condition and com- 
mon nature. | 
Under this arrangement, it follows that the north-western 
parts of the first quadrant, or that of Europe, are in -fami- 
liarity with the north-west triplicity, composed of Aries, 
Leo, and Sagittarius; and they are accordingly governed by 
the lords of that triplicity, Jupiter and Mars, vespertine. 
These parts, as distinguished by their appropriation’ to entire 
nations, are Britain, Galatia, Germany, Barsania*, Italy, 
Apulia, Sicily, Gaul, Tuscany, Celtica, and Spain. And, 
since the triplicity itself and the planets connected with it.in 
dominion are adapted to command, the natives of these 
countries are consequently impatient of restraint, lovers of 
freedom, warlike, industrious, imperious, cleanly, and high- 
. minded. But, owing to the vespertine configuration of 





* Or;perhaps, Bastarnia, apart of the.antiont Buropean Sarmatia. 


Chap. Ti.) . eroLemy’s TETRABIELOS. 65 


Jupiter and Mags, as well as the masculine condition of the 
anterior parts of the triplicity, and the femjnine condition of 
its latter parts*, the said nations regard women with scorn 
and indifferencet. They are, however, still careful of the 
community, brave and faithful, affectionate in their fa- 
milies, and perform good and kind actions. 

Among the countries before named, Britain, Galatia, Ger- 
many, and Barsania have a greater share of familiarity with 
Aries and Mars; and their inhabitants are accordingly wilder, 
bolder, and more ferocious. Italy, Apulia, Sicily, and Gaul 
are in familiarity with Leo and the Sun; and the natives of 
these couatries are more imperious, yet kind and benevor 
Jent, and careful of the commonwealth. Tuscany, Celtica, 
and Spain, are connected with Sagittarius and Jupiter; and 
their inhabitants are lovers of freedom, simplicity, and ele- 
gance. 

The south-eastern parts of this quadrant, which are sity- 
ated towards the middle of the earth, viz. Thrace, Macedonia, 
Illyria, Hellas, Achaia, and Crete, as well as the Cyclad 
Isles and the shores of Asia Minor and of Cyprus, assume, 

in addition, a connection with the south-east triplicity, 
which is composed of Taurus, Virgo, and @apricorn, and 
- uled by Venus and Saturn; and, in consequence of the vicini- 
ty of these regions to the middle of the earth, Mercury like- 





* This should probably be understood te mean in a mundane point 
of Niew, Agregably to Chap. 6 and 15, Book i. For when Aries is on 
the agcendant, it is, of course, oriental and masculine ; and Sagitta- 
rigs must consequently then be in the eighth house, occidental, and 
‘therefore feminine. 

+The customs of nations have,in some degree, altered Ajace 
WMolamy made this severe. fupeiey ——. us and our brethren in the 
part of the original. text : apes | ae: a6 cueing rey apoennery crnsrepseror 
nas Enrurlec, mar pants asorypoy pore avay3pov Ture vopasCovler. See cure uds 
sx Averras, er: wl: a wacxorlec- Scanesvres em TUT W, BAO guiasiucs THe duxac 


ayPasutts. 
K 


“ 


66 PTOLEMY 8 TETRABIBLOS. ' (Book IT. 


wise has a proportionate dominion over them. Hence their 
inhabitants, being subjected to the rulers of both triplicities, 
enjoy a favourable temperament of mind and of body. .From 
Mars they imbibe their fitness for command, their courage, 
and impatience of restraint ; from Jupiter their love of free- 
dom, their self-rule, their skill in guiding public affairs, and. 
in legislation : through the influence of Venus they are also 
lovers of the arts and sciences, as well as of music and 
poetry, of public shews, and all the refinements of life: and 
from Mercury they deduce their hospitality, their fondness 
for society and communion, their love of equity and of 
literature, and their power of eloquence. They are also. in 
the highest degree conversant with sacred mysteries, owing 
to the vespertine figuration of Venus. 

It is further to be observed of these last-named countries, 
that the inhabitants of the Cyclad Isles, and of the shores of 
Asia Minor and of Cyprus, are more particularly under the 
influence of Taurus and Venus, and are therefore voluptuous, - 
fond of elegance, and over-studious in their attention to the 
body. The people of Hellas, Achaia, and Crete, have a 
stronger familiarity with Virgo and Mercury, and are there- 
fore learned and scientific, preferring the cultivation of the 
mind to the care of the body. The people of Macedonia, 
Thrace, and Illyria, are chiefly influenced by Capricorn and 
Saturn ; whence they are greedy of wealth, inferior in civi- 
lization, and have no ordinances of civil polity. > 

The second quadrant consists of the southern division of 
Asia Magna. Such of its parts as are contained in India, 
Arriana, Gedrosia, Parthia, Media, Persia, Babylonia, Me- 
sopotamia, and Assyria, are situated in the south-east of the 
whole ‘earth, and have due familiarity with the south-east 
triplicity (composed of Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn), and 
consequently with Venus, Mercury, and Saturn, in matu- 
tine figuration, The nature of the inhabitants of these coun- 
tries is obedient to the dominion of these ruling influences ; 


Chap. II1.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 67 


they worship Venus under the name of Isis; and they also 
pay devotion to Saturn, invoking him by the name of 
Mithranhelios. Many of them likewise foretell future events; 
and they consecrate to the gods some of their bodily mem- 
bers, to which superstition they are induced by the nature of 
the figuration of the planets before mentioned*. They are, 
moreover, hot in constitution, amorous and lustful, fond of 
acting, singing, and dancing, gaudy in their dresses and 
omaments ; owing to the influence of Venus. Saturn, 
however, inclines them to simplicity of conduct ; and, in 
consequence of the matutine figuration, they address their 
women publiclyt. There are also many among them who 
beget children by their own mothers{. The matutine figu- 
rations also influence their mode of worship, which is per- 
formed by prostration of the breast ; because the heart is the 
nobler part of the body, and, in its vivifying faculties, acts 
like the Sun. And, although the influence of Venus makes _ 
the people, generally speaking, finical and effeminate in their 
personal adornment and apparel, yet the connection which 
Saturn holds with them, by means of the east, still renders 
them great in mind, eminent in council, courageous and 
warlike. | oe 

It is to be remarked, that Parthia, Media, and Persia, have 
a more particular familiarity with Taurus and Venus; whence 
it follows that the dwellers in those countries wear splendid 
garments, and clothe the whole person entirely, except the 
breast ; they are also fond of elegance and refinement. The 

SUR CJR ne neerte eemmeneeenernen eeaceeeeneneeeneennnnnnnennns enna 

* The Greek is as follows: sai ra jsopia avras ra yenihea avdlbsace 
was Stoic. Sere © aynpalepeos tov aspntyw? acspuy quest owtppalsxog acer. 
Follies, similar in their kind to these, are still practised by the Faquirs 
of Hindostan, and by other religious sects in Asia. 

T @avepers westpeeves vac mpeg Vag yurainac CUrEC LAS. 

t The author gives a singular reason for this incest: pucuce 3: vac 
(evveciac) weeg vec aposvag tie TETO mal OF WAMCOL GUTOD 6S THE BTEgHE 


TAAVET ONT te 
A 


68 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS: [Book Kf. 


countries about Babylon, Mesopotamia, and Assyria, are 
connected with Virgo and Mercury; their inhabitants -are 
consequently studious of the sciences, atid, among other 
attainments, excel in making observations on the five pla- 
nets. India, Arriana, andeGedrosia, are conneeted with 
Capricorn and Saturn; the natives of thése régions are, 
therefore, ill-formed in person of dirty habits, and barbarous 
manners. 

The remaining parts of this second quadrant, viz. Idu- 
mea, Coslesyria, Judea, Phoenicia, Chaldzea, Orchynia, and 
Arabia Felix, occupy a situation in the vicinity of the mid- 
dle of the earth, and in the north-west of the quadrant to | 
which they actually belong: hence they are in familiarity 
with the north-west triplicity (which consists of Aries, Leo, 
and Sagittarius), and they have for their rulers, Jupiter and 
Mars, together with Mercury. By means of the figuration 
of these planets, the natives of the said countries are skilful 
in trade and all mercantile affairs, heedless of danger, yet 
treacherous, servile, and thoroughly fickle. 

The inhabitants of Ccelesyria, [Iduméea, and Judea, are 
principally influenced by Aries and Mars, and are generally 
audacious, atheistical*, and treacherous. The Phcenicians, 
Chaldzeans, and Orchynians, have familiarity with Leo. and 
the Sun, and are therefore more simple and humane in 
disposition ; they are also studious of astrology, and pay 
greater reverence than all other nations to the Sun. The 
people of Arabia Felix are connected with Sagittarius and 
Jupiter; the country is fertile, and abundantly productive of 
spices; and its inhabitants are well-proportioned in person, 
free in all their habits of life, and liberal in all their contracts 
and dealings. 

* This epithet is remarkable, not only as being, in the opinion of a 
Gentile, merited by the Jews, among other nations, but also at a 


period scarcely exceeding a century after their mast heinous crime 
had been committed, expressly under the cloak of religion. 


Chap. HHI.} PTOLBMY’S THT RABIBLOS. 69 
The third quadrarit oceupies the uorthern division of Asia 
Magna. Those several parts of it which lie to the north- 
east of the whole earth, and comprise Hyreania, Armenria, 
Mantiana, Bactriana, Caspena, Serica, Sauromatica, Oxiand, 
and Sogdiasta, are in familiarity with the north-east tripli- 
city, composed of Gemini, Labra, and Aquarius, and have 
for their rolers Saturn and Jupiter, in matatine positions ; . 
hence the inhabitants worship Jupiter and the Sun*. They 
are abundantly rich in all things: they possess much gold, 
and are dainty and Juxurious in their diet. They are also 
learned im theology, skilled m magic, just in all their deal- 
ings, free and noble-minded, holding dishonesty and wicked- 
ness in abhorrence, strongly imbued with the softer affec- 
tions of nature; and, in a worthy cause, they will even - 
readily embrace death to preserve their friends. They are, 
furthermore, chaste in marriage, elegant and splendid in 
their dress, charitable and beneficent, and of enlightened in- 
tellect. All these qualities are principally produced by the 
matutine positions of Saturn and Jupiter, who influence the 
region. 
Among these nations, however, Hyrcania, Armenia, an 
Mantiana, have a greater familiarity with Gemini and Mer- 
cury ; and the inhabitants are consequently more acute in 
apprehension, but less tenacious of their probity. The 
countries about Bactriana, Casperia, and Serica, are con- 
nected with Libra and Venus; and the natives are endowed 
with much wealth and many luxuries, and take delight in 
poetry and songs. The nations about Sauromatica, Oxiana, 
and Sogdiana, are influenced by Aquarius and Saturn ; and 
are therefore less polished in manners, and more austere and 
uncouth. 
The other parts of this quadrant, lying near the middle 
of the entire earth, consist of Bithynia, Phrygia, Colchis, 





* Other copies say “ Saturn,” 


70 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. {Book IT. 
Laxica, Syria, Commagene, Cappadocia, Lydia, Lycia, 
Cilicia, and Pamphylia. These, being situated in the south- 
west of their quadrant, have familiarity accordingly with 
the south-west triplicity, composed of Cancer, Scorpio, 
_and Pisces, and are ruled by Mars and Venus, together with . 
Mercury. In these countries Venus is principally worship- 
ped ;- she is invoked as the. Mother of the Gods, and by 
various local and indigenous appellations; Mars likewise 
receives adoration here, under the name of Adonis, as well 
as by other titles* ; and some of the religious services to 
these deities are performed by loud lamentations. The 
people are servile in mind, diligent in labour, yet fraudulent, 
knavish, and thievish: they enter into foreign armies for — 
‘the sake of hire, and. make prisoners and slaves of their 
own countrymen: besides which, they are continually subject 
to intestine broils. These traits arise from the matutine’ 
figurations of Mars and Venus.—It is further to be observed, 
that, from the circumstance of Mars receiving his exaltation 
in Capricorn (one of the. signs of the triplicity ruled by 
Venus), and Venus hers in Pisces, (a sign belonging to the 
_ triplicity of Mars), it thence follows that the women have 
strong attachments and kindly affections to their husbands,. 
are vigilant and careful in domestic affairs, and highly“ in- 
dustrious ; they also act as servants, and labour for the men, 
with all due obedience, in every thing. 

Bithynia, Phrygia, and Colchis, must however be ex- 
cepted from sharing in this general propriety of the female 
character; for, as these nations are chiefly connected with 
Cancer and the Moon, their male population is, generally 


aE Re AE SEE PTET SP I TEE LIES EI ED ET PCTS Se TOA SE TIE OEE 


* Itis usually understood that the male deity, coupled by the Phry- 
gians with Cybele, “ the mother of the Gods,” was called by them 
Atys; and that Adonis was the name used by the Phoenicians in 
addressing the associate of Venus. It has been said that these divi- 
nities were identicat with the Isis and Osiris of the gyptians. 


» 


Chap. III.) PTOLEMY’S TRTRABIBLOS, me “ZI 
speaking, slavish in its -habits, timid and superstitious, 
while the greater part. of the women, owing to the matu- 
tine and masculine position of Vhe Moon, are of mas- 
culine manners, ambitious of command, and warlike. 
These females shun the addresses of men, as the Amazons 
did of old, and delight in the use of arms, ‘and in manly 
occupations: they also amputate the right breasts of their 
female children for the sake of adapting them to military 
service, and in order that, when in combat and exposing _ 
that part of their body, they may appear to be of the male 
sex.—Again, Syria, Commagene, and Cappadocia, are prin- 
cipally influenced by Scorpio and Mars; and their inhabi- 
tants are accordingly bold, wicked, treacherous, and labo- 
rious. Lydia, Cilicia, and Pamphylia, have a greater fami- 
liarity with Pisces and Jupiter ; whence their inhabitants are 
wealthy, of mercantile habits, living in freedom and in 
community, faithful to their engagements, and honest in 
their dealings. 

“Phe. remaining quadrant is the vast tract known by the ge- 
‘neral name of Libya. Its several:parts, distinguished by the 
particular names of Numidia, Carthage, Africa*, Phazania, 
Nasamonitis, Garamantica, Mauritania, Getulia, and Meta- 
gonitis, are situated in the south-west of the entire earth, 
and have due familiarity with the south-west triplicity, 
composed of Caneer, Scorpio, and Pisces ; ‘their rulers 
therefore are Mars‘and Venus, in vespertine position. From 





oe ae 


* The name of Africa was, in Ptolemy’s time, limited to those 
parts of the coast on the Mediterranean which contained the antient 
Utica, and in which Tunis now stands. Josephus says the name is 
derived from Afer, (one of the posterity of Abraham by Cethurah) © 
who is stated to have led an army into Libya, and to have established 
himself in the country. This Afer is, of course, the 4ame with Epher, 
mentioned in the fourth verse of the 25th chapter of Genesis, as 
a son of. Midian, one of the sons of Abraham by his concubine — 

Keturah. 


72 PTOLRMY’S TRTRABIBLOS. [Book Tk. 
this figuration of the planets it results that the dwellers in 
these regions are doubly governed by a man and a womaa,. 
who are both children of ¢he same mother; the man rules 
the males, and the woman the females. They are extremely 
_ hot in constitution, and desjrous of women ; their marriages 
are usually made by violence, and in mapy districts the 
local princes first enjoy the brides of their subjects: in some 
places, however, the women are common to all, The 
influence of Venus causes the whole people to delight in 
personal ornaments, and in being arrayed in female attize : 


- nemertheless, that of Mars renders them: courageous, crafty,’ 


addicted to magic, and fearless of dangers. 


Again, however, of the abovernamed countries, Nee. : 
midia, Carthage, and Africa, are more particularly in fagi- ~ 


liarity with Cancer and the Moon: their-inhabitants, conse~ 


qvently, live in community, attend to mercantile pursuits, “: 
and enjoy abundantly all the blessings of natyre. The ~ 


natives of Metagonitis, Mauritania, and Getylija, are -in- 
fluenced by ‘Scorpio and Mars, and are consequently fero- 
cious and pugnacious in the highest degree; eaters of 
human flesh, utterly indifferent to danger, and so regardless 
and pradigal.of blood, as to slay each other -without hesita- 
tien on the slightest,cause, The people in Phazania, Na- 
samoanitis, and Garamantica, are connected with Pigces and 
Jupiter, and are gecordingly frank and simple in manners, 
fond of employment, well disposed, fond of the decencies 
of life, and, for the most part, free and unrestrained in their 
actions : they worship Jupiter by the name of Ammon. 
The.other parts of this quadrant, which lie near the mijd- 
dle.of the entire caath, are Cyrsnaica, Marmarica, Aigypt, 
Phebais, Oasie, Eroglodysiea, Arabia, Azania, and Middle 
YEthiopia. These countries, ibeing situated in the north- 
east of their quadrant, have due familiarity. with the north- 
east triplicity, (consisting . of Gemini, Libra, and. Aquarius), 
and ate goxerged by Satuen and Jupiter, and alsp by Mer- 
‘cury. Their inhabitants, therefore, participate in the M- 


‘7. 


Chap. INI.) PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 73 


fluence of all the five planets in vespertine figuration, and 
consequently cherish due love and reverence for the gods, © 
and dedicate themselves to their service. They are addicted 
to sepulchral ceremonies ; and, owing to the said vespertine 
position, they bury their dead in the earth*, and remove 
them from the public eye. They use various laws and 
customs, and worship divers gods. Ina state of subjections — 
they are submissive, cowardly, abject, and most patient; _ 
but when they command, they are brave, generous, and 
high-minded. Polygamy is frequent among them, and | 
practised by the women as well as the men : they are most 
licenfious in sexual intercourse, and allow incestuous com- 
merce between brothers and sisters. Both men and- women 
are extraordinarily prolific, and correspond in this respect 
with the fecundity of their soi]. Many of the men. are, 
however, effeminate and debased in mind; in consequence 
of the figuration of the malefics, together with the vespertine 
position of Venus ; and some of them mutilate their per- 
‘sonst. 

- Among these last named saunttiens Cyrenaica, Marmarica, 
and particularly Lower Egypt, are chiefly influenced by 
Gemini and Mercury: the natives are therefore highly in- 


me: 





© It does not appear why this practice should have been remarked 
_ asa national peculfarity, unless in distinction from the custom‘of burn- 
ing the dead among the Greeks and Romans. Interment is recorded 
as having been usual among the Jews, and it is known to have been 
-common among many antient barbarous nations. 

A conjecture may perhaps be allowed, that the author, when he 
wrote this passage, had in his mind the magnificent subterranean 
palaces, constructed for the dead, in parts of the region in ques- ° 
tion; some of which have been recently made known to the modern 
world, by the sagacity and enterprize of the celebrated Belzoni. 

T Tone 2s was nalapgovect rev yavrilixne sshov.—The “ contempt” here 
' expressed by sclaggovecs has been taken by: all translators (except 
Whalley) to signify “ mutilation.” 


L 


¥4 PLULEMY’S TETHABIDLOS. — (Book tt. 


tellectual and sensible, and gifted. with capacity for every 
undertaking 3 above all, for the attalnment of wisdom, ard 
an insight into divine tysteriess They are also magicians, 
perfotmning secfet rites atid cetemonivs, and ate in every 
téspéct calculated for the prosecution of all scientific inquiry*, 
The inhabitants of: Thebais, Oasis, and Troglodytica, ate : 
cbntiected with Libra and Venus; they ate of warmer ¢on+ 
stitution, aiid mote hasty disposition, ahd enjoy life in all 
its plettitude and abundance. The natives of Arabia, Asa- 
Hia, and Middle Athiopia, -have familiarity with Aquatius 
atid Saturn's they consequently feed on flesh and fish indis- 
éviminately, and live itt a state of dispersion Jike wild 
beasts; they nevet nite in society, but lead a wandering 
and savave life. 

The fatniliarities exercised by the Planets, and by the 
Signs of the Zodiac, together with the manners, . customs, 
aiid qualities, particular as well as general, whith they 
pfoduce, have now beett concisely described;. but in order 
to facilitate the knowledge and use of them, the subjoined 
table is Inserted, to show, at one view, what countries are 
in cotittection with each sigh, respectively, accotding to the 
“fthode above detuiled, 7 





“* History warrants the high eacomium here given to the natives 
of these countries.— Aigypt was the acknowledged mother of the 
arts and sciences, and at one time the great depot of all the learning 
of the world: her school of astronomy (a science which our author 
may be supposed to have placed in the first rank), founded at Alex- 
andria by Ptol. Philadelphus, maintained its superior reputation for a 
thousand years. Cyrettaica gave birth to many iHustrious philoso- 
phers, and, among them, to Eratosthones, who is said to have invented 
the armillary sphere. ‘This great man measured tke obliquity of the 
ecliptic, and, though he erroneously reokoned it at only 904 degrees, 
it should be recollected that he lived 200 years before the Christian 
erh. He also measured a degrée of the meridian, and determined 
the extent of the carth, by means. similar to those adopted a oF 
. Moderns. . | Daeg 


13 


PTOLEME & TBTRABIBLOS. 





Chap, III.) 





am psec rem aaa ASE ER LTE SI TE ETE TIE DEE OE ENR EE I DE EAD EADIE ESOL BYALA RED EEE CE IIE gD EI, 









































By dgdueg | eidorgy ay 2)PPHA _ BEekTER -apopaddey | von {popfoie "y2409 
WEONITD _ wnezy | euepeseyy | xyay viquiy | anoFemm0| arseq | 2y2 fo aypprw 2y? 
eipary | Biquiy Qoel Bhs STEqOUT, feu sotsgun0D 
wey pon [ wom wnog | 80,4 moon | vex mneg | orem mon | a0M Mog | |, fe Goi 
BOTPUTULCIL) | wUBIPSUS Visolpor | - uns Bynyory) vaLag "y2ina ayzfo 
smrgounsey | BUAXO wUSIUY SOO). | BIfRELNE A] wurodsey | appr ay? wouf 
BIURZRY J VOT VMORILS ‘Puy Auvosay, | = snprotejoy BUBLNOVE | ajows4 sascquno,D 
wom wgos | wer ano «| sea moog | y0M qHORL,| yee nog | “I8MT THON eer : 
ISOM Boog | ery qaoN | ise gIROS | 38AA ANOR | “is0Ay ynog | “3am qUOND | “AnoteecE 
‘so08slg | SILLIVHD YE {| smuoojiduy | ‘snueydeg {| -o1diosg “eiquy | “aulng 
via (qIIQ | 2919100) Way 2 M0'F JOUR visy veepeg | “yuna 
seaaret BVpRyy wskigg | vouewieyy smidio vauinpy | ay1,fo appprus ay? 
SUIT BPOlUDy J ea Xaaigg wormnou9 sopujaiy wiksojae) AVL SORL7E 
wom WON |’ ser qinog =| ase MON | om ROG | wom THON | THEE MOS |, MT 
meg VinGsitEg 
sar MOS ame BUVI}UVY VIS1Ig Auewuag | besa cad 
vioohqeg uindy quey vHOUNY eIpony wryepeg | ee 
erurjodore Wy Arery espa ermwosd eI eg uplig | [NS MND 
{eI "NOS | 89/4 QUON | 198 At WITIOG qe WON | 4seq Tog | 32K ION Lov fe moanon 
‘seq nos | “wom BION | AL MOS | Iseq WON | Wem nos | WEA WON | 








‘OBILA | ire | | weomvg | wmumory | ‘snmey | *soL_Ly [ one : 





*Ajaeaj20dsas NOS. YIM) 07 BerBuopg salaLNa0D ay 2]9 Furnoys a1EV0 


76 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book If. 


Chapter IV. 


| The Familiarity of the Regions of the Earth with the fixed 
Stars. 


In addition to the rules which have been already ci re- 
specting the familiarity of the regions of the earth with the: 
signs and planets, it must be observed, that all fixed stars 
which may be posited on any line, drawn from one zodiacal 
pole.to the other, through such parts of the zodiac as may 
be connected with any particular country, are also in fami- 
liarity with that particular country. 

And, with regard to metropolitan cities, it 1s necessary to 
‘state, that those points or degrees of the zodiac, over which 
the Sun and Moon were in transit, at the time when the 
construction of any such city was first undertaken and com- 
menced, are to be considered as sympathizing with that 
city in an especial manner; and that, among the angles, 
the ascendant is principally in accordance with it. In cer~ 
tain cases, however, where the date of foundation of a me- 
tropolis cannot be ascertained, the mid-heaven in the nati-° 
vity of the reigning king, or other actual chief magistrate, 
is to be substituted, and considered as that part of the aes 
with which it chiefly sympathizes*. 


Chapter V. 
Mode of particular Prediction in Eclipses. 


_Arrer having gone through the necessary preliminary to- 
pics, it is now proper to speak of the manner in which 
predictions are to be formed and considered; beginning 





* Whalley remarks on this passage, that the gradual progress of 
the fixed stars “ from one sign to another, is in an especial manner 
“‘ to be regarded in considering the mutations, manners, customs, 
“* laws, government, and fortune of a kingdom.” 


Chap. VI] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, 77 


with those which: relate to general events, affecting either 
certain cities, or districts, or entire countries. 

The strongest and principal cause of all these events exists 
in the ecliptical conjunctions of the Sun and Moon, and in 
. the several transits made by the planets during those con- 
junctions. 

One part of the observations, required in forming predic- 
tion in cases of this nature, relates to the locality of the event, 
and points out the cities or countries liable to be influenced 
by particular eclipses, or by occasional continued stations of 
certain planets, which at times remain for a certain period in 
one situation. These planets are Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars ; 
and they furnish portentous indications, when they are sta- 
tionary. 

Another branch relates to time, and gives akties 
_ of the period at which the event will occur, and how long 
it will continue to operate. 

The third branch is generic; and points out the classes, 
or kinds, which the event will affect. 

The last part is specific; and foreshows the actual quality 
and character of the coming event. | 


Chapter VI. | , 
The Regions or Countries to be considered as liable to be 
comprehended in the Event. 


Tue first of the several branches of consideration just 
enumerated relates to locality, and is to be exercised in the 
following #MAnner :— 

. In all eclipseg..of the Sun and Moon, and especially in. 
such as are fully visible, the place in the zodiac, where:.the 
eclipse happens, i is to be noted; and it must be seen what 
countries are in familiarity with that place, according to the es 
rules laid down regarding the quadrants and the triplicities ; 


and in like manner it must be observed va es are under 


78 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book iI. 


the influence of the sign in which the eclipse happens; 

either by means of the ascendant, and the situations of the 
luminaries at the time of their foundation, or by means of 
the mid-heaven of their kings or governors, actually ruling 
at the time of the eclipse; although such time may be sub- 
sequent to the building of the said cities. Whatever coun- 
tries or cities shall be thus found in familiarity with the 
ecliptical place, will all be comprehended tn the event ; 
which will, however, principally attach: to ali those parte 
which may be connected with the identical sign of the 
eclipse*,, and in which it was visible while above the earthf. 


Chapter VII. 
The Time and Period of the Event. 


Tux second point requiring attention relates to time, and 
indicates the date when the event will take place, and the 
period during which its effect wil] continue: these are to be 
ascertained in the following manner. 

It must however be premised, that as an eclipse, ocenir- 
ring at any particular season, cannot happen in all climates 
at the same temporal or solar hourf, so: neither will the 
magnitude of the obscuration, nor the time of its conti- 
nuance, be equal in all parts of the world. First, therefore, 





* A’s shown in the Table at page 75. . 

¢ It-dees not appear that the text iw warrants the conclusion 
which Whalley bas drawn from it, viz. “that wherever eclipses are — 
** not visible, they have no influence, and therefore subterranean 
“ eclipses cannot have any.” Ptolemy declares, that aff countries jn 
familiarity with the ecliptieal place will be comprehended in the 
exent ; and, with regard to the visibility or invisibility ef the eclipas, 
he says merely that its effects will bo principally felt ia such of the 
said countries as might baye obtained a view of the eclipse, . 

{ Temporal or solar hours are duodecimal parts of the Sun's divgr- 
nal or nocturnal arc, and are amie hic, fies sun-rise to sun- 
set; by nigitt, fom san. 


Chap. VII.) ProLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. 79 


(as is done in a.nativity) the angles are to be arranged, in 
every country connected with the eclipse, according to the 
hour at which the eclipse takes place and the elevation of 
the pole in that coutitry. The time, during which the ob- 
scuration of the eclipse may continue in each country, is 
then to be noted in equatorial hours*. And, after these 
‘patticulats have been carefully observed, it is to be under- 
stood that the effect will endure as matiy yeats as the ob- 
scuration lasted hours, provided the eclipse was solar; but 
if lunar, a like number of months is to be reckoned instead 
of years. 

The commencement of the effect, and the period of its 
general intensity, or strength, are to be inferred from the 
situation of the place of the eclipse with respect to the 
angles. For, if the ecliptical place be near the eastern ho- 
rizon, the effect will begin to be manifested in the course of 
the first four months after the date of the eclipses and its 
general height, or intensity, will take place in, or about, the 
first third part of the whole extent of its duration. If the 
ecliptical place happen to be in or near the mid-heaven, the 
effect will begin to appear in the second four months, and 
its general intensity will occur about the second third part ; 
and, if the place should fall near the western horizon, the 
effect will begia in the third four months, and take its ge- 
neral intensity in the last third part of its whole durationt. 





* Equatorial hours are the twenty-four hours of the earth’s revo- 
lution on its axis. Each of them is equal in duration to the passage 
of 15 degrees of the Equator; and they are numbered from noon.to 
noon. A particular explanation of the astronomical use, both of 
tettiporal and equatorial hours, is to be found in the 9th Chapter of 
the second Book of the Almagest ; an-extract from which is given in 
the Appendix. 

+ The three periods of four-months each, stated in this paragraph, 
are applicable to solar eclipses only; for lunar eclipses, these periods 
may be reckoned at ten days each; that number of days bearing the 
same proportion to a month, as four months to a year. On this point, 





80 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, { Book II, 


. Partial intensities, or relaxations of the effect, are, how- 
ever, to be inferred from any combinations which may hap- 
pen during the intermediate period*, either in the actual 
places where the primary cause was presented, or in other 
places configurated therewith. They are also to be conjec- 
tured by the various courses, or transits, of such planets as 
co-operate in producing the effect, by being configurated 
with the sign in which the primary cause was situated ; and, 
with this view, the matutine, vespertine, or stationary posi- 


- tion, or midnight culmination of those planets must be ob- 


served ; for the effect will be strengthened and augmented 
by their matutine or stationary position; but weakened and 
diminished by their being vespertine, or situated under the 
sunbeams, or by their midnight culmination. 


Chapter VII. 
The Genus, Class, or Kind, liable to be affected. 
Tae third division of these observations relates to the mode 
of distinguishing the genus, or species, of ‘animals or. things 


about to sustain the expected effect. This distinction is 


made by means of the conformation and peculiar properties 
of those signs in which the place of the eclipse, and the 


‘places of such fixed stars and planets, as are in dominion ac- 


cording to the actual sign of the eclipse, and that of the 
angle before it, may be found. And a planet, or fixed star, 


is to be considered as holding dominion when circumstanced 
as follows. 





Whalley, with his usual inaccuracy, has asserted, that “in eclipses 
“< of the Moon, two days, or thereabouts, are equal to the four months” 
here reckoned in eclipses of the Sun. He adds, however, what per-_. 
haps may be true, that “ lunar eclipses are by no means so powerful 
“* as those of the Sun, although more so than any other lunation.” 

* That is to say, from any combinations of the Sun and Moon which 


may take place after the date of the eclipse, but before the. close of 
its effect. 


Chap, VHI.] PTOLRMY’s FRTRARIRION, 8} 


If there be found ene planet having more numerous clqims 
than any other to the place of the eclipse, as well as to that 
of the angle, being also in the immediate vicinity of those 
places, and visibly applying to, or receding frona theis, and 
having likewige more rights over other places connected 
with them by configuration; the said. planet being, at the 
same time, lord by house, triplicity, exaltation, and terms 5 
in such a case, only that single planet is entitled to domi- 
nion, But, if the Jord of the eclipse and the Jord of the 
angle be pot identical, then those two planets which have 
most connections with each plage are to be noted; and, of 
these two, the lord of the. eclipse is to be preferred to the 
chief dominion, * although the other is to be considered as 

“6 bearing rule conjointly*.”’ And if more than two should 
be fonnd, having equal pretensions to each place, that par- 
ticular ong among them which may be nearest to an angls, 
ox mest Concerned with the places in question, by the nature 
of its condition, is to be selected for dominiont. 

But, among the fixed stars, the chief bright one, (which, 
during the time of the eclipse, may hold connection, in any 
of the nine modes of apparent configuration detailed in the 
First Syntaxist with the angles then actually in passage), 48 
to be admitted to dominion ; as also that one which, at the 
eoliptical boyr, may be in an eminent situation, either having 
Tien, or having culminated with the angle following tee - 
_ Place of the eclipse}j. 


Ce ae 

* 'The edition of Allatius does not contain the words here, marked 
by inverted commas; but Shey are found in other copies of the text, 
Mind soem necessary kd Complete the seune of the passage. 
_. ¢ “ When planets, in election for Lords of the eclipse, are found 
“ of equal strength and dignity, those which are direct are to he pre- 
“ famed before those which are retrograde; and the oriental before 
“ the accidental.” —W halley’s * Annotations.” 

I That is to any, in the Almagest, Book 8, Chap. 4; wiiek abapter 
is given, entire, in the 

¥ “In electigg Gxed stars, Carden direets to observe the angle 

M 


82 PTOLEMY’S TRTRABIBLOS. ' (Book It. 
| Having coitsidered, according to the foregoing rules, what 
stars‘ co-operate in regulating: the coming event, the con- 
formation and figure of the signs, in which the-eclipse takes 
place and the said. ruling stars may be posited; dre also to'be 
observed; and, from the properties and .charaeteristies: of 
‘those signs, the genus or species, to be comprehended i in ‘the 
et is. chiefly to be inferred. rs 
. For instance, should the zodiacal constellations, and those 
‘of the ruling fixed stars out of the zodiac, be of human 
shape, the effect will fall upon’ the human nice. If the 
‘signs be not of human shape, but yet terrestrial, or quadru- 
‘pedal, the event would be indicated to happen to animals of 
‘githilar form: the signs shaped. like reptiles signify that 
-gerpents and creatures of that description will be affected ; 
those bearing the figure of ferocious beasts denote that ‘the 
event will affect savage and destructive animals; and those 
figured like tame beasts show that it will operate on animals 
serviceable to mankind, and of domestic character; as inti- 
‘mated by the shape and figure ofthe signs, whether resem- 
bling horses, oxen, sheep, or any other useful animals.—In 
‘addition to this, the terrestrial signs situated in the north, 
‘about the Arctic circle, indicate sudden earthquakes ; and 
those in the'south, sudden deluges of rain. And, should 
the ruling places be. situated in signs shaped like. winged 
animals, as in that of Aquila, or in others of similar form, 
the event will take effect on birds; and will chiefly attach 
to those which afford food to man. If the said places should 
be in signs formed like creatures which swim, and in marine 
signs, such as Delphinus, the effect will be felt by marine 





“ which ‘the eclipse follows, and that which it precedes: as, if the . 
. © eclipse be between the seventh house” (or occidental angle) “ and 
“ the mid-heaven, the stars which are in the seventh shall be preferred; 
* and next, those in the mid-heaven ; but, if between the mid-heaven 
‘* and the ascendant, those in the mid-heaven shall have the prefer- 
“ ence; and next, those in the ascendant.” — Whalley’s “ Annotations.” 


— Chap. VIL] = protemy’s TETRABIBLOs. , 83 
animals, and in the navigation’ of fleets ; if in river. signs, 
such as Aquarius and Pisces, it will attach to animals living. 
in rivers and in fresh water: and, if.in Argo, both sea. 
and fresh-water animals will be affected by it*. 

Again, should the ruling places be situated in tropical 1 or: 
in equinoctial signs, in either case alike they presignify 
changes in the: state of the atmosphere, at the respective. 
season to which each sign is appropriated. For. example,: 
with regard to the season of spring and the productions of - 
the earth, if the said places should be in the sign of the vernal 
equinox, they will produce an effect on the buds of the vine 
and fig, and of such other trees as sprout forth at that season. 
Should they be in the sign of the summer tropic, the event 
will affect the gathering and depositing. of fruits; and, with. 
respect to Egypt in particular, it will impede the rising of 
the Nile. If they should be in the sign of the autumnal 
equinox, they foreshow that it will operate on grain and on 
various sorts of herbs; if in the sign of the winter tropic, 
on potherbs, esculent ‘vegetables, and such birds and fishes 
as arrive in that season. | 

The equinoctial signs further indicate the circumstances 
liable to happen in ecclesiastical concerns, and in religious 
matters: the tropical signs give warning of changes in the 
atmosphere and in political affairs; the fixed signs, of 
changes in institutions and in buildings ; and the bicorporeal 
. signs show that the future event will fall alike on princes 
and their subjects. 

Again, the ruling places situated in the east, during the. 
‘time of the eclipse, signify that fruits and seeds, incipient 
institutions, and the age of youth, will be affected ; those 

ee Ee re eae ee eee 5 ee een ne 
© It is perhaps unnecessary to remark, that, in speaking of ruling 
places, as liable to be situated in Aquila, Delphinus or Argo, Ptolemy 
alludes only to the places of the fixed stars in dominion: since the 
ecliptical place and the planets must be confined to the zodiacal signs. 





84. PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, (Book Ii, 


whieh : may be in the mid-beaven above the earth announce. 
that the coming event will relate to ecclesiastical affairs, to. 
kings and princes, and to the middle age; these in the 
west, that at will influence the laws, old age, and persons 
about to die. 

The proportion liable to be affected, of that penus or kind 
on which the event will fall, js to be ascertained by the mag~ 
nitude of the obscuration caused by the eclipse, and by the 
positions held by the operative stars in regard to the eclip- 
tical place; as, in vespertine position to a solar eclipse, of 
in’ matutine position to a lunar eclipse, the said-stara will 
most usually much dimimish the effect ;—in opposition 
they render it moderate ;—but in matatine position to ‘a solar 
eclipse, or in vespertine to a lunar, they = augment 
aad extend it*. 


Chapter IX. 
The Quality and Nature of the Effect. 


Tue discrimination of the peculiar properties and character 
_of the effect about to be produced, and of its good or evil 
nature, occupies the fourth and last division of this part of 
the subject. 

These properties must be gathered from the power of the 
stars which controul the ruling places, and ftom the con- 
temperament created by their relative admixture with each 
other and with the places which they controul. For, ‘at- 
though the Sun and Moon are the acknowledged sources of - 





* ‘According to ‘Whalley, Cardan, in refefenceé to the nine modes 
of corifiguration, ‘applicable to the fixed stars, says, “ When & fixed 
“ star is with any planet, or in any angle, consider whether it be by 
“ any of these ways; if not, it is most weak; if it be, consider whe- 
ther it be with the Suh, and not to be seen; then it is very weak. 
« Or if it is to be seen, and ts with the Sun ocvidental, it is indifferent. 
“ Or if it be seen, and is hot with the San, it isutrouger; er if it de 

““ Seen, and fs orrental, fren & ts strongest.” 


Chap. [X%.] © PFOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. §3 


all the efficacy and dominion of the stars, and of their 
strength ot weakness, and in a certain manner regulate and 
command them, still, it is by the theory of the contemperas 
ment, produced by the stars in dominion, that tie ofioes ® 
indicated. 

In order tO understand the indications thus made, it is 
necessary to begin by attending to the followmg detail of 
the effective property of each planet— previoubly observing, 
however, that, when any circumstance is said,‘ for the sake 
ef brevity, to come to pass by the general influence of the 
five planets, their tempetament, and the power and assistance 
they maay derive from natures similar to their own, the ac- 
tual continuance of their own proper constitution, or ,the 
casual combination of any analogous influence, arismy from 
fixed stars or places in the zodiac, are all, at the same time, 
to be kept in view. Consequently, whenever any general 
remark 4s herein made felative to the five planets, it will 
likewise be srectssacy to beat in mind both their temperament 
and quality ; as fully, indeed, as if the stars themselves had 
not beet named, but only their effective. quality and nature, 
And, it is further to be remembered, that, ‘im every case of 
compound temperament, not only the consbination of the 
plamets with each other requires to be considered, but also 
that of such fixed stars and zodiacal places as share in the 
natures of the planets, by being respectively cormected with 
‘them according to the fainiliavities already described, 

Hence, when Saturn may be sole governor, he will pre- 
duct. disasters. concomitant with cold. And, in as far 36 
the event. may apply to the human race m particular, it will 
induce among meen lingering diseases, consutmptions, de- 
chines, rheumatisoss, disorders from watery humours, and ut+ 
tacks of the quartan ague; as well as efile, poverty, anda 
general mass of evils,.griefs, and alarms: deaths also will be 
frequent, but chiefly among persons advanced in age. ‘That 
part of the brute creation which is most serviceable to man 


86 ‘PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. {Book II. 


will likewise suffer, and be destroyed by disease; and men 
who make use of the animals thus diseased will be infected 
by them, and perish with them. The atmosphere will be- 
come dreadfully chill and frosty, unwholesome, turbid and 
gloomy, presenting only clouds and pestilence. Copious 
and destructive storms of snow and hail will descend, gene- 
rating and fostering insects and reptiles noxious to mankind. 
In rivers, and at sea, tempests will be frequent and general, 
causing disastrous voyages and many shipwrecks ; and even 
fish will be destroyed. The waters of the sea will retire for 
atime, and again return and produce inundations 3; rivers 
will overflow their banks, and cause stagnant pools ; and the 
fruits of the earth, especially such as are necessary to sustain 
life, will be lost and cut off by blight, locusts, floods, rains, 
hail, or some similar agency ; and the loss will be so ex- 
tensive as to threaten even famine. 

Jupiter, if he should be lord alone, will thoroughly im- 
prove and benefit all things. Among mankind, in parti- 
cular, this planet promotes honour, happiness, content and 
peace, by augmenting all the necessaries and comforts of 
life, and all mental and bodily advantages. It induces also 
favours, benefits, and gifts emanating from royalty, and adds 
greater lustre to kings themselves, increasing their dignity 
and magnanimity: all men, in short, will share inthe 
prosperity created by its infld@ence. With regard to the 
operation of the event on brutes, those which are domestic 
and adapted to man’s service will be multiplied and thrive ; 
while others, which are useless and hostile to man, will ke 
destroyed. The constitution of the atmosphere will be 
healthy and temperate, filled with gentle breezes and mois- 
ture, and ‘favourable to fruits. Navigation will be safe and 
successful ; rivers*will rise to their just proportion ; fruits 
and grain, and all other productions of the earth conducive 


to the welfare and peppinese of the world, will be peer 
in abundance. 7 


Chap. 1X.]  -—»- PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. 8T 

Mars, when governing alone, generally causes such tiis- 
chief and destruction as is concomitant with dryness. And, 
among mankind, foreign wars will be excited, accompanied - 
with intestine divisions, captivity, slaughter, insurrections of 
the people, and wrath of: princes against their subjects ; 3 to-" 


gether with sudden and untimely death, the consequence’ ‘of 


. these distufbances. Feverish ‘disorders, tertian agues, and 
hsemorrhages will take place, and will be rapidly followed by’ 


painful death, carrying off chiefly youthful persons’! and’ 


conflagration, murder, impiety, every infraction of the law, 
adultery, rape, robbery, and all kinds:of violence will be 
‘practised. Fhe atmosphere will be parched by hot, pestilential, 

and blasting winds, accompanied by drought, lightnings, 
and fires emitted from the sky. At sea, ships will be sud- 
denly wrecked by the turbulence of the wind and strokes of 
lightning. Rivers will fail, springs will be dried up, and’ 
there will be a scarcity of water proper for food and suste- 
nance. All the creatures and productions of the earth 
adapted to the use of mian, whether beasts, grain, or fruits, 
_ will be damaged or destroyed by excessive heat, by storms 
of thunder and lightning, or by violent winds; and what- 
_ ever has been deposited in store will be destroyed or injured 
by fire, or by heat. 

Venus; alone in dominion, generally produces the same 
effects as Jupiter, yet with greater suavity and more agree- 
ably. Glory, honour, and joy will attend mankind ; happy 
marriages will be contracted, and the fortunate pairs will be 
blessed with numerous children. Every undertaking will 
proceed prosperously, wealth will increase, and the conduct 
of human fife will be altogether pure, simple and pious ; 


due reverence being paid to all holy and sacred institutions, - 
and harmony subsisting between princes and their subjects. 


The weather also will be of a favourable temperature, cooled 
by moistening breezes; the air altogether pure and salu- 


- 


88 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. (Book -If. 


briaus, frequently refreshed by fertilizing showers; Voyages 
‘will be performed in safety, and be attended by success and 
profit. Rivers will be improved, and receive their adequate 
supply of waters; and al] things valuable and useful to man- 
kind, whether animal or vegetable, will abundantly thrive 
and multiply. . 

Mercury, if possessing dominion, is usually conjoined 
with one or other of the planets beforementioned; and is 
conformed and assimilated to their natures; yet a8, jn it- 

sclf, it presents a certain addition to their power, this planet 
_ inereases the respective impulses of them al]. And, in re- 
gard to the operation of the event on mankind, it will pro- 
mote industry and skill in business ; but, at the same time, 
thievish propensities, robberies, and plots of treachery: if 
configurated with the malefics, it will produce calamities in 
navigation, and will also cause dry and parching diseases, 
quotidian fever, cough, consumption, and hemorrhage.— 
All parts of the ceremonies and services of religion, the af- 
fairs of the executive government, as well as manners, cus- 
toms, and laws, are disposed and regulated by this planet, 
conformably to its admixture and familiarity with each of 
the others. And in consequence of the dryness of its na- 
- ture, arising from its proximity to the Sun, and the rapidity 
of its motion, it will generate in the atmosphere turbulent, 
sharp and variable winds, ‘together with thunders, meteors, 
and lightnings, accompanied by sudden chasms in the earth, 
and earthquakes ; by these means it not unfrequently occa- 
sions the destruction of animals and plants assigned to the 
service of mankind. Besides the foregoing effects, it pro~ 
duces, when in vespertine. position, a diminutiorm of waters, 
and, when matutine, an augmentation. 

Each of the planets, when fully exercising its.own separate 
and distinct influence, will properly produce the peculiar 
effects above ascribed to it ; but should it be combined with 
others, whether by configuration, by familiarity arising from 


Chap. 1X.) PTOLEMY’S TETRABJBLOS. 89 
from the sign in which it may be posited*, or by its position 
towards the Sun, the coming event will then happen agree- 
ably to the admixture and compound temperament which 
arise from the whole communion actually subsisting among 
the influencing powers. It would, however, be a business 
of infinite labour and innumerable combinations, quite. be- 
yond the limits of this treatise, to set forth fully every con- 
temperament and all configurations, in every mode in which 
they can possibly exist; and the knowledge of them must 
therefore be acquired by particular discrimination in every 
instance, under the guidance of the precepts of science,— 
Yet the following additional remark must not be here 
omitted. | | , 

The nature of the familiarities, subsisting between the 
stars, lords of the coming event, and the countries or cities 
over which the event will extend, requires to be observed-; 
for, should the stars.be benefic, and their familiarity with 
the countries liable to sustain the effect be unimpeded by 
any opposing influence, they will then exercise the favour 
" able energies of their own nature in a greater degree. And, — 
on the other hand, when any obstacle may intervene to ob- 
struct their familiarity, or when they themselves may be 
overpowered by some opposing influence, the advantages 
of their operation will be diminished. Again, should the 
stars, lords of the coming event, not be benefic, but in- 
jurious, their effect will be less severe, provided they may 
either have familiarity with the countries on which the event 
will fall, or be restrained by some opposing influence. If, 
however, they should have no such familiarity, and not be 
subjected to restraint by any others, endowed with a nature 
contrary to their own and’ possessing. a familiarity with the 





* That is to say, (technically speaking,) by reception, or by being 
posited in a sign in which another planet has a certain dignity or — 
prerogative. 

N 


90 PYOLEMY'S TETRABIBLOS. {Book '1. 


‘countries 4n. question, the evils which they produce will. . 
thea be more violent and intense. And all these general 
‘afections, of whatever kind, whether pood of evil, will be 
ptiwelbally felt by those persons in whose individual nati- 
wittes there may be found the sathe disposition of the lutni- 
naries; (which ate the most essential significators,) or the . 
vattre angles, as those existing during the eclipse which 
‘operates the getreral affection. The same remark equally 
applies to other persons, in whose nativities the dispésition 
of the luminaries and of the angles may be in opposition to 
that existing during the eclipse. With respect té these 
tvincidences, the partile agreement, or opposition, of the 
ecliptical place of the luminaries to the place of either fumi- 
nary in a nativity, produces an effect least capable of being 
guarded against*. | 


' % In conformity to the rule laid down in Chap. 6 of this Book, 
those individwals whose nativities may thus resemble the position of 
the heavens at the tine ef an eclipse, and who are hore stated te be 
chiefly liable to the effects of the eclipse, wi be more affected by it, 
if it should be visible to them. | 
To the precepts contained in this chapter, Placidus makes the fol- 
lowing allusion, in his remarks on the nativity of Cardinal Pancirole. 
~—* Any significator whatever, together with the other stars, whilst 
“ they are moved by a converse universal motion, change the aspect 
“ alternately, and consequently the mowdane rays, a3 it likewise 
“ happeas when thoy acquire parallels t—the rays thus acquired are 
“ af along continuance, arid denote a certain universal disposition 
“ of the things signified, either good or bad, according to the nature 
“* of the aspeécting stars; as it happened to this Cardinal, who some 
“ years before his denth was always sickly: and this observation {3 
“ wonderful in the changes of the Yimes and weather ; for this prin- 
“ eiple Ptolemy adhered to in the Almagest, lib. VIII, cap..4; and 
“ this doctrine he also mentions in the 2d Book of Judgments, in 


cf = ne on the Natare of Events.”—(Cooper’s Translation, 
pave) , 


Chap. X.] FPIOLEMY’§ FETRABIBLOS, 92 


Chapter x. 


| Colours in, Eclipses; Comets, and semilar Phenomena. 


In investigating general events, it is necessary further to 
observe the colours or haes displayed during an eclipse, 
either in the luminaries, or around them ; in the shape af 
rods or rays, or in other similar forms. For, if these co- 
lours or hues should be black, or greenish, they portend ef- 
‘fects similar to those produced by Saturn’s nature ; if white, 
to those operated by Jupiter; if.reddish, to those by Mars ; 
if. yellow, to those by Venus; and if of variqus colours, to 
those by Mercury, 

And, if the entire bedies of the luminaries be thus co- 
loured, or should the hues extend over all the parts imme- 
diately circumjacent to the luminaries, it is an indication that 
the effects will attach to most parts of the region, or counr 
tries, with which the eclipse and its ruling places may be in 
familiarity. If, however, the colouring should not spread 
over the whole surface of the luminaries, nor over all] the 
parts around them, but be limited to some particular quarter, 
then only such a portion of the said countries, as may be 
indicated by the situation of the visible hues, will be com~ 
prehended in the event. 

It is also requisite to notice, with respeet to general events, — 
the risings or first appearances of those celestial phenomena 
called comets, whether presenting themselves at ecliptical 
times or at any other periods,. They are displayed in the 
shape of beams, trumpets, pipes, and in other similar figures, 
and operate effects- like those of Mars and Mercury; ex- 
citing wars, heated and turbulent dispositions in. the atmo- 
sphere, and in the constitutions of men, with all their evil 
consequences. The parts of the zodiac* in which they 

* When a cemet appears out of the zodiac, a line should be drawn 
from one zodiacal pole to the othes, through the spet where it ap- 


92 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book If. 


may be posited when they first appear, and the direction and 
inclination of their trains, point out the regions or places 
liable to be affected by the events which they threaten ; and 
their form indicates the quality and nature of those events, 
as well as the genus, class, or kind, on which the effect will 
fall. The time of their continuance shews the duration of 
their effect ; and their position, with regard to the Sun, the 
period when it will commence; as, if they first appear ma- 
tutine, they denote an early commencement ; but, if vesper- 
tine, that it will be late and tardy. 

The general and more comprehensive parts of the consi- 
deration regarding regions, countries, and cities, having now 
been explained, it becomes necessary to discuss certain par- 
ticular points of the same consideration ; that is to say, the 
annual occurrences which take place at certain fixed seasons, 
and the chief of which is that called the New Moon of the 


Year. 
. @hapter XI. 
The New Moon of the Year. 


In every annual revolution made by the Sun, the first new 
Moon of the year is to be considered as the point of the 
commencement of his circuit; this is evident not only from 
its denomination, but from its virtue also*. 





pears; and that spot is to be considered as being in familiarity with 
the same countries as those parts of the zodiac which may be on the 
same line.—Vide Chap. 4 of this Book, relative to the manner in 
which fixed stars out of the zodiac hold familiarity with certain re- 
gions and countries. ~ 

* The Neomenia, or new Moon, was observed as a festival with 
much solemnity in earlier ages and by the most ancient nations. It 
was celebrated by the Israelites, as well as by Pagans; and it may 
perhaps be gathered from the 5th and 6th verses of the 20th Chapter 
of the 1st Book of Samuel, that it was kept once in a year with great- 
er ceremony than at other times: this was done, probably, at the 
“ New Moon of the Year,” as Ptolemy calls it } or, in other words, at 
the new Moon nearest to the vernal equinox. 


Chap. XI.) PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. — . 98 


The case stands thus:—In the ecliptic, which, asa circle, 
has in fact’ no actual or definite beginning, the two equi- 
noctial and the two tropical points, marked by the equator 
and the tropical circles, are reasonably assumed as begin- 
nings. And to obviate any doubt as to which of these four 
points should prefergbly be considered as the primary begin- 
ning, (since in the regular simple motion of a circle no part 
of it has any apparent precedence,) the appropriate quality 
naturally belonging to each of these four points has been 
taken into consideration by the -writers on this subject. 
And the point of the vernal equinox has been consequently 
designated by them as the beginning of the year ; “hecause, 
from that time, the duration of the day begins to exceed 
that of the night, and because the season then produced 
partakes highly of moisture, which is always a predominant 
quality in all incipient generation and growth. After the 
vernal equinox comes the summer solstice; when the day 
attains its greatest length, and in Egypt, at the same period, 
the rise of the Nile takes place and the Dog Star appears. 
Then follows the autumnal equinox, when all fruits, are 
gathered in, and the sowing of seeds recommences anew ; 
lastly, comes the winter solstice, when the day proceeds from 
its shortest duration towards its increase. 

Although the foregoing armngement has been adopted by 
men of science to denote the commencement of the several 
seasons of the year, it yet seems to besmore consonant to 
nature, and more consistent with the facts, that the com- 
bined positions of the Sun, and the new, or fall, Moon, 
which happen when the Sun is nearest to “the points above- 
mentioned, should mark the four beginnings; and more 
especially if such combined positions should produce eclipses: 
thus, from the new or full Moon, taking place when the 
Sun is nearest to the first point of Aries, the spring should 
be dated; from that when the Sun is nearest to the first 
point of Cancer, the summer ; from that when he is nearest 
to the as point of Libra, the autumn; and from that when 


= 


M4 PTOLEMY'§ TRTRABIBLOS. | [Book II. 


he. ig nearest to the first point of Capricorn, the winter. 
The Sun not only produces the general qualities and copsti- 


tutions of the seasons, by means of which very illiterate 


persons are enabled, in a certain degree, to form predictions, 
but he also regulates the proper significations of the signs 
with regard to the excitation of the winds, as well as other 
general occurrences, more or less subjected to occasional vari- 
ation. All these general effects are ysually brought about 
by the new or full Moon which takes place at the aforesaid 
points, and by the configurations then existing between the 
luminaries and the planets: but there are certain particular 
cansequences which result from the new and full Moon ig 
every sign*, and from the transits of the planets; ‘ and 
«* which require monthly investigationt.”’ . 

It therefore becomes necessary to explain, in the first in- 
stance, the particular natures and attributes exeroised. by 
each sign in influencing the several constitutions of the 
weather, as it exists at various times of the year ;—these 
natures and attributes shall now be immediately detailed, 
It will be recollected, that the peculiar properties of the 
planets and the fixed stars, as affecting the wind and the’ 
atmosphere, as well as the manner in which the entire signs 
hold familiarity with the winds and the seasons, have been 


already set forth. 7. 
Chapeer XII. 


The particular Natures of the Signs by which the different 
Constituttons of the Atmosphere arc produced.* 


Tue sign of Aries has a general tendency, arising from the 
presence of the Equinox, to promote thunder and hail. 


*. That is to say, at the new and full Moon taking place during the 
Sun’s progress through each sign. 

+ The passage marked thus “ ” is not in the Greek, but is found 
in two Latin copies. or 

} According to Wing, in his “ Introduction to the Ephemaides,” 
printed in 1642, the signs, as mentioned in this chaptex by Ptolemy, 
ara to he considered in thaix quality as constellations, and not as 


Ohap. X11.) _yototamy’s tetRabteies. 95 
‘Certain of its’ parts, however, opernte im a greater or les 
degree, accoitting to the nature of ‘the stars which compose 
‘the sivtit fot instance, the front parts excite rain and wind ; 
the middle are temperate ; and those behind are heating ard 
pestilential, The sorthern perts, aleod, ate heating and 
peniicious, but the southers cooling and frosty. 

The sign of Tautus, in its general character, partakes of 
both temperaments*, but is trevertheless chiefly warm. Its 
_ front parts, and especially those neat the Pleiades, produce 

‘earthquakes, clouds and winds: the middie parts are moist- 
ening and cooling s those behind, and neat the Hyades, are 
fiery, and cause meteors and lightnings. The northem 
parts ate temperate ; the southern turbulent and variable. 


Gemini, in its general tendency, is temperate; but its - 


fending perts produce mischief by moisture} its middle parts 
are entirely temperate; its latter parts mixed and turbulent. 
The northern patts promote earthquakes and wid 3 and the 
gouthern are dry ard heating. 

‘Caneer is, in the whole, serene end warm, but its anterior 
“parts near the Preesepe are oppressively hot and euffocating ; 
the middle parts are temperate, and the latter parts excite 
wind. And doth its northern and southern parts ate equally 
Mery and seorching. 

Leo has 8 general tendeticy operative of stifling heat. 
The anterior parts are opprestively and pestilentially trot ; 
yet the middle parts are tetnperate and those behind are 
injurious by meatts of woisture.. The northert parts pro- 
duce vatiation and heat, and the gouthera moisture. 

Virgo, in its general tendency, excites moistute and thun- 








spaces of the heavens. * This opinion, however, seems to me to be 
erroneous; for Ptolemy has already devoted a chapter in the ist Book 
to the detail of the influences of the several stars in the respective 
constellations of the zodiac; and he moreover speaks, in the present 


_ chapter, of the operation of Ariés, as owing to the presence of the - 


Equinox. ‘This he could not have done, bad he spoken of the signs 
as Sostollations: instead of spaces. 
¢ The temperaménts here alluded to ate, probably, heat ad cold. 


™* 


\ 


96 PTOLEMY’S PRTRABIBLO® [Book If. 


der. The front. parts, however, are chiefly warm and 
noxious ; the middle temperate ; and the latter parts watery. 
The northern parts promote wind; the southern are tem- 
perate. 

Libra has a general tendency to produce change and varia- 
tion. Its front and middle parts are temperate; its hinder 

‘parts watery. The northern parts cause variable winds, and 
.the southern are moistening and pestilential. 

Scorpio, in its general character, is fiery and productive 

of thunder. The front parts cause snow; the middle are 
temperate; the latter parts excite earthquakes. Its northern 
parts are heating ; its southern, moistening. 

Sagittarius, generally, 1s effective of wind. The front 
parts are moistening ; the middle temperate ; and the hinder 
parts fiery. The northern parts promote wind, and the 
southern variation and moisture. 

Capricorn’ s general tendency i is to operate moisture. But 
its anterior parts are pernicious by means of heat, its mid- 

dle. - parts: are temperate, and its latter parts promote rain. 
Both, its:northern and southern parts are injurious by means 
of moisture. 

Aquarius, in its general character, is cold and watery. 
The front parts are moistening ; the middle temperate; and 
the latter parts productive of wind. The northern parts are 
heating ; the southern cause snow. 

Pisces, in its general character, is cold and effective of 
wind. The front parts are temperate ; the middle moisten- 
ing ; the hinder parts highly heating. The northern parts 
excite wind, and the southern are watery. 


ss @Hapter XII. 
Mode of Consideration for particular Constitutions of the 
_ Atmosphere. 


Tux first part-of ‘the consideration, requisite to form an 
estimate of the various constitutions liable to take effect in 


Chap. XIII.] —- PTOLEMY’s TRTRABIBLOS. 97 


the atmosphere, applies to the general qualities pervading 
the several quarters of the year, and has therefore the most 
extended scope. In order to learn these qualities, it is neces- 
sary, in every quarter, to observe, as above directed, the 
new or full Moon which may happen before* the period of 





© «< Before.” Although I have thus englished the word #e, I think 
it properly requires to be here rendered, by “at” or “near to,” rather 
than “before.” Firstly, because my author, (in speaking of the com- 
mencement of each quarter of the year, in the 11th Chapter, p- 93,) 
has expressly stated that “ the spring is to be dated from the new or 
“full Moon taking place when the Sunis nearest (slyica) to the first 
“ point of Aries ; the summer from that, when he is nearest the first 
“‘ point df:Cancer,” &c. kc.; and (in p. 98) he states that certain 
‘“ general effects are brought about by the new or full Moon occurring 
“ at (nave) the aforesaid points.” Secondly, because, in a few lines 
further on, in speaking of the monthly consideration, p. 98, he again 
uses only s/y.ca, in reference to the present passage, in which, how- 
ever, he has used only ee. Thirdly, it is a proper inference that he 
meant to point out here the new or fall Moon whieh may happen 
’ nearest to the tropical or equinoctial points, because he has pXiviously 
and explicitly tanght that the principal variation of all things depends. 
upon those points. Lastly, Allatius has here readered the word by 
no other than prozimé, which is also the word given in the Perugio 
latin of 1646. 

On the other hand, Whalley, in his note on the present chapter, 
says, that “ according to this-Prince of Astrologers,” (meaning Pto- 
lemy) “we are to observe the new or full Meon preceding the in- 
“ gress, only, for our judgment on the succeeding quarter, and not the 
“ Junation succeeding : and the reason I conceive to be, because the 
“ lunation, which immediately precedes the ingress, carries its influ- 
*‘ ence to the very position of the ingress itself, but not so that which 
** follows the ingress.” Wing, in his Introducti the Ephemerides 
(London 1652)also says, that “for the knowledgé of the weather, it is 
** requisite to observe the conjunction or opposition of the luminaries 
“ next preceding the Sun’s ingress into the first point of Aries.” 

Now, if a new or full Moon happen wamediately after the Sun’s 
transit or ingress, the previous full or new Moon nrast have happen- 
_ od a fortnight before the said transit or ingress; and, after considering 

the other parts of Ptolemy’s doctrine, I -do not conceive, that he 
o 


98 PTOLEMY’S TE1RABIBLOS. _ [Book If. 


. the Sun’s transit through either tropical or equinoctial : 


point, whichever it may be ;- and to arrange the angles (as in 


the case of a nativity) according to thé degree and hour at: 


which the new or full Moon may be found to happen, in 
every latitude for which the consideration may be desired. 
Such planets and stars as may have dominion over the 
places where the said new or full Moon happens, and over 
the following angle, are then to be noted; in the same 
manner as that stated with regard to eclipses. And after 
these preliminary steps have been attended to, a general 


inference may be drawn as to the proper qualities of the- 
whole quarter; and the intensity or relaxation of their ope-. 
ration is to be contemplated from the natures of the ruling. 


planets and stars, distinguished by the faculties they possess, 
and by the mode in which they affect the atmosphere, 

The second part of the consideration relates to each month, 
and requires a similar observation of the new or full Moon 
first taking place on the Sun’s progress through each sign: 
and it gaust be remembered, that, if a new Moon should have 
happened at a period nearest to the Sun’s transit over the 
past tropical or equinoctial point, the new Moons also in 
each succeeding sign, until the commencement of the next 
quarter, are to be observed ; but, if a full Moon should have 
so happened, then similar observation is to be made of each 
subsequent full Moon. The angles, also, must be duly 
attended to, as well as the planets and stars ruling in both 
the places* ; and especially the nearest phases, applications, 





intended to teach Minis chapter, that a previous lunation, when at 
ao greata distance before the important ingress, would have a great- 
er influence over the ensuing quarter of the year, than a subsequent 


lunation taking place so closely after the said ingress. 


* “ Both the places.” These are the places of the new or full 
Moon, and of the following angle ; as before mentioned with regard 
to the quarterly consideration. 


Chap. XIII.] ProLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. 99 


and separations of the planets, and their properties. The. 
peculiar qualities of the two places, and the winds, liable 
to be excited by the planets themselves and by those parts 
of the signs in which they may be situated, are likewise to 
be considered; and also that particular wind, which is 
indicated by the direction of the Moon’s ecliptical latitude. 
By the aid of these observations, and by weighing and com- 
paring the existing vigour of each of the several properties 
and qualities, the general constitution of the atmosphere 
during each month may be predicted. 3 

The third part of this consideration appertains to signifi- 
cations applying more minutely, and points out their force 
or weakness. In this case, the partile configurations of the 
Sun and Moon, at the intermediate quarters, as well as at 
the new or full Moon, are to be attentively regarded ; since 
there is a certain variation in the constitution of the atmo- 
sphere, which usually commences about three days before, 
and sometimes, also, about three days after the Moon has 
equated her course to the Sun. The configurations effected 
_ between the Moon, at each quarterly equation, and the 
planets, whether by the trine, sextile, or other authorized 
distances, are also to be observed; because the peculiar 
property of the change in the constitutions of the atmo- 
sphere depends much upon such configurations, and may 
be accordingly perceived by. considering the nature of the 
influence which the said configurated planets and the signs 
exercise over the atmosphere and the winds. 

The particular quality of the weather, thus produced, will 
be more fully established on certain days; especially when * 
the brighter and more efficacious fixed stars may be near the 
Sun, either matutine or vespertine; as, when so posited,. 
they most frequently convert the constitution of the atmo- 
sphere to an agreement with their own natures: and, when 
the Luminaries may transit any one of the angles, a similar 
effect is also produced. At all such positions the particular 


100 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. * [Book If, 


- constitutions of the atmosphere are subject to variation, and 
thus become altetnately more intense or more relaxed in 
their respective qualities. In this manner, by certain posi- 
tions of the Moon, the flux and reflux of the sea are caused : 
and, when the Luminaries may be in angles, a change of 
the wind is produced, according to the direction of the 
Moon’s ecliptical latitude. 

Finally, in all these considerations, it must be remem- 
bered that the more general and first constituted cause takes 
precedence, and that the particular cause comes subse- 
quently and secondarily : and, that the operation is in the 
highest degree confirmed and strengthened, when the stare, 
which regulate the general effects, may be also configurated 
towards the production of the particular effects. 


Chapter XIV. 
The Signification of Meteors. 


IN order to facilitate prognostication in minor and more 
limited instances, it is important to make further observa- 
. tion of all remarkable appearances occasionally visible around 
or near the Sun, Moon, and stars. And, for the diurnal 
state of the atmosphere, the Sun’s rising should be remark- 
ed; for the nocturnal state, his setting; but the probable 
duration of any such state. must be considered by reference 
to the Sun’s configuration with the Moon; for, in most 
cases, each aspect, made between them, indicates the con- 
tinuance of a certain state until another aspect shall take 
place. | 

Hence, the Sun, when rising or setting, if he shine clear 
and open, free from mists, gloom, and clouds, promises 
serene weather, But, if he have a wavering or fiery orb, 
Or seem to emit or attract red rays, or if he be accompanied 
m any one part by the clouds called parhelia, or by other 
reddish clouds of extended figure; in the form of long rays, 


Chap. XIV.] PTOLEMY’5 TETRABIBLOS. ‘101 


he then portends violent winds, chiefly liable to arise from 
those parts in which the said phenomena may have shewn 
themselves. If he shoujd.be pale or lurid, and rise or set 
encumbered with clouds, or surrounded by halos, he indi- 
cates storms and winds coming from the quarter of his ap- 
parent situation : and, if he be also accompanied by parhelia, 
or by lurid or dark-rays, similar effects are also threatened 
from the parts where those appearances may be situated*. 

- The Moon’s course is to be carefully observed, at the 
third day before or after her conjunction with the Sun, het 
opposition, and her intermediate quarters; for, if she then 
shine thin and clear, with no other phenomena about her, 
' she indicates serenity; but, if she appear thin and red, and 
have het whole unilluminated part visible, and in a state of 
vibration, she portends winds from the quarter of her latitude 
and declination} : and if she appear dark, or pale and thick, . 
she threatens storms and showers. All halos formed around 
the Moon should also be observed ; for, if there appear one 
only, bright and clear, and decaying by degrees, it promises 
serene weather; but, if two or three appear, tempests are 
indicated: and, if they seem reddish and broken, they 
threaten tempests, with violent and boisterous winds; if 
dark and thick, they foreshew storms and snow; if pale, or 
black and broken, tempests with winds and snow, both: 





* Similar precepts may be found finely ‘illustrated in Virgil’s 1st 
Georgic, vide 1. 438 et infra: 
““ Sol quoque et exoriens et cum se condit in undas 
“‘ Signa dabit -” - 





+ Virgil has said almost the same thing in these beautiful lines : 
“ At si virgineum suffuderit ore ruaborem _ 
“‘ Ventus erit: vento semper rubet aurea Phoebe.” . 
Georg. I, 1. 480. 
Sce also the whole passage, beginning at 1, 424: 
“ Si vero Solem ad rapidum Lunasquc sequentes 
“ Ordine respicies,” &e. 


(102 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IT. 


and, whenever a greater number my appear, storms of greater _ 
fury are portended. 
_ The planets, also, and the brighter fixed stars, Occasion- 
ally have halos, which indicate certain effects appropriate to 
their tinctures, and to the nature of the stars around- which 
they may be situated. 

The apparent magnitudes of the fixed stars, and the co- 
lours of the luminous masses among them, are likewise to be 
remarked: for, when the stars appear brighter and larger 
than usual, they indicate an excitation of the wind from that 
quarter in which they may be situated. The nebulous mass 
of the Praesepe in Cancer, and others similar to it, also re- 
quire observation ; as, if in fine weather they appear gloomy 
and indistinct, or thick, they thereby threaten a fall of rain; 
but, if clear and in continual vibration, they announce rough 
gales of wind*. - 

Appearances occasionally visible ‘in the sky, reaeeabling 
the trains of cometst, usually indicate wind and drought ; 
In a degree popecmer to their multitude and conti- 
nuance. 

Appearances, resembling shooting or falling stars, when 
presented. in one part only, threaten a movement of wind 
from that partt ; when in various and opposite parts, . they 





* At this place, the following sentence, not found in the Greek, is 
inserted in a Latin translation : 

“ If the northern of the two stars, situated one on cach side of the 
“« Preesepe, and called the Asini, should not appear, the north wind 
“will blow: but, if the southern one be invisible, the south wind.” 

+ These coruscations are, perhaps, similar to those now known by 
the name of the Aurora Borealis. . 


} Virgil again : 
“ Seepe etiam stellas vento impendente videbis 
** Precipites coelo labi.”—&c. Georg. I, |. 365. 


A great part of the 1st Georgic consists of astrological rules for pre- 
dicting the weather, closely resembling the precepts here given by 
Ptolemy. Virgil is said to have adopted his doctrine from Aratus. 


f 


Chap. XIV.] —- PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. - 103 


portend the approach of all kinds of tempestuous weather, 
together with thunder and lightning. Clouds resembling 
fleeces of wool will also sometimes presage tempests ; and 
the occasional appearance of the rainbow denotes, in stormy . 
weather, the approach of serenity ; in fine weather, storms.— 
And, in a word, all remarkable phenomena, visible in the 
sky, universally portend that certain apprapriate events will 
be produced, each harmonizing with its Proper cause, in the 
manner herein described. 


After the foregoing brief investigation of the more limited 
as well as more extensive significations, regarding general _ 
events, it becomes proper to proceed to the doctrine of ge- 
‘nethliacal prognostication, or judgment of individual nati-— 
vities. 


Enp or Book II. 





104  PIOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. { Book Il. 


BOOK THE THIRD. 
Chapter I. 


Proem. 


IN the preceding pages, such events as affect the world 
generally have been discussed in priority ; because they are 
operated by certain ‘principal and paramount causes, which 
are, at the same time, predominant over particular and mi- 
nor events applicable only to the separate properties and 
natural peculiarities of individuals, The foreknowledge of 
these particular*events is called Genethlialogy, or the science 
of Nativities. — 

It must be remembered that the causation, by which all 
effects, whether general or particular, are produced and fore- 
known, is essentially one and the same ; for the motions of 
the planets, and of the Sun and Moon, present the operative 
causation of events which happen to any individual, as well 
as of those which happen generally ; and the foreknowledge 
of both may be obtained by the same accurate observation of 
the distinct natures of the several creatures and substances, 
subjected to the influence of the heavenly bodies, and by due 
attention to the changes produced in those natures, by the 
configurations displayed in the Ambient by the planetary 
motion. | 

Still, however, the causes of general events are greater and 
more complete thgn those of particular events; and, al- 
though it has been now stated, that one single identical 
power supplies both the causation and the foreknowledge of 


Chap. EJ PTOLEMY’S TRTRABIBLOS. 105 


general as well as particular events, yet there does not be- 
long to the two Sorts of events a similar origin or beginning, 
at which observation of the ccelestial configurations must be 
made, for prognostication. In regard to general events, the 
dates of origin and commencement are many and various ; 
for all general events. cannot be traced to one origin, neither 
is their origin always considered by means of the matter sub- 
jected to thetr operation, for it may be also established by 
circumstances oceurring in the Ambient and presenting the 
causation. It may, in fact, almost be said that they all ori- | 
ginate in eminent eclipses of the Luminaries, and in remark- 
able transits made by the stars, at various times. 

_ Particular events, however, which concern men indivi- 
_ dually, may be traced to one origin, single as well as mani- 
fold. Their origin is single, in respect to the primary com- 
position of the nascent man; but it is also manifold, in T@- 
spect to other circumstances subsequently indicated by dispo- 
sitions in the Ambient, correlative to the (inary origin. Fn 
all particular events, the origin, or birth, of th@yeubjected 
matter itself, must of course be the primary origin ; and, in 
succession thereto, the various beginnings of other subse- 
quent circumstances are to be assumed. Hencm thyefore, 
at the origin of the subjected matter, all the properties and 
_ peculiarities of its contemperament must be observed; and 
then the subsequent events, which will happen at certain 
periods, sooner or later, are to be considered by means of the 
division of time, or the scale of the ensuing years*. 








* The Division of Time is subsequently laid down by the author, 
in the last Chapter of the fourth Book. 


106 PTOLEMY 'S TETRABIBLOS. [Book. IIT. 


Chapter Il. 


The Conception, and the Parturition, or Birth; by which 
latter Event the Animal quits the. Womb, and assumes ano- 
ther State of Existence. 


THE actual moment, in which human generation com- 
mences, is in fact, by nature, the moment of the conception 
itself; but, in efficacy with regard to subsequent events, it is 
the parturition or birth. 

In every case, however, where the actual time of concep- 
tion may be.ascertained, either casually or by observation, it 
is useful to remark the effective influence of the configura- 
tion of the stars as it existed at that time; and, from that 
influence, to infer the future personal peculiarities of mind 
and body. For the seed will, at the very first, and at once, 
receive its due quality, as then dispensed by the Ambient ; 
aid, although WMpubsequent periods ‘its substance is varied 
by growtkgand conformation, it will still, by the laws of 
nature, congregate, during its growth, only such matter as 
may be proper to itself, and will become more and more im- 
bued sith ghe peculiar property of the first quality impressed 
on itat the time of conception. These precepts must always 
be attended to, when that time can be ascertained. | 

But, if the time of coneeption cannot be precisely made 
out, that of the birth must be received as the original date 
of generation ; for it is virtually the most important, and is 
in no respect deficient, on comparison with the primary 
origin by conception, except in one view only; viz. that 
the origin by conception affords the inference of occurrences 
which take effect previously to the birth, whereas the origin 
by birth can, of course, be available only for such as arise 
subsequently. And, although the birth should in strictness 
be called the secondary beginning, while the conception 
might be insisted on as the primary beginnihg, it is still 





Chap. ¥I.J PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 107 


found to. be. equal to the conception in its efficacy, and 
much more complete, although later in time. For the con- 
ception may, in fact, be said to be the generation of mere 
human seed, but the birth that of man himself; since the 
infant at its birth acquires numerous qualities which it could 
not possess while in the womb, and which are proper to 
human nature alone; ‘*such, for instance, as the particular 
‘© action of the senses and the movement of the body. and 
‘‘ jimbs*.”’ Besides, even if the position of the Ambient, 
actually existing at the birth, cannot be considered to assist 
in forming and engendering the particular shape and quali- 
ties of the infant, it is nevertheless still auxiliary to the in- 
fant’s entrance into the world: because nature, after com- 
pleting the formation in the womb, always effects the birth 
In immediate obedience to some certain position of the Am- 
bient, corresponding and sympathizing with the primary 
position which operated the incipient formation. It is there- 
fore.perfectly admissible, and consistent wi reason, that the 
configuration of the stars, as it exists at the time of birth, 
although it cannot be said to possess any share of the crea- 
tive cause, should still be considered to act in signification, 
as fully as the configuration at the time of conception; be- 
cause it has, of necessity, a power corresponding to that con- 
figuration which actually possessed the creative cause. 

In speaking of the practicability of prognostication, in the 
commencement of this treatise, the intention. of setting forth 
this part of the subject, now under consideration, in a scien- 
tific manner, fas been already notified. The antient mode. 
of prediction, founded on the commixture of all the stars, 
and abounding in infinite complication and diversity, will 
therefore be passed over ; and, in fact, any attempt to detail 
it, however accurately and minutely made, in conformity to 
pS a a 

* The words, thus marked “ ”, are not in the Greek, but in twe 
Latin translations. | 


« 


- - 
er eee ee ee 


- _ = See SS oe 


108 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IIT, 


the several precepts given in the traditiong relating to it, 
‘ would prove unserviceable and unintelligible: it is there- 
fore entirely abandoned. And the doctrine, now presented, 
comprehending every species of event liable to happen, and 
explaining all the effective influences generally exercised by 
the stars, in their separate qualities, over every species of 
event, shall be delivered succinctly, and in agreement with 
the theory of nature. : 
With this view, certain places in the Ambient, regulating 
‘the formation of all inferences of the events liable to affect 
mankind, are appointed as a kind of mark to which the whole 
theory of those inferences is applied, and to which the opera- 
tive powers of the stars, when holding familiarity with the 
said places, are in a general manner directed: in the same 
way as, in archery, the arrow is directed to the target.—And 
any event, which depends on the compound temperament of 
many various natures and influences together, must be left to 


, the discretion ofthe artist, who, like the skilful archer, must 


himself judge of the best mode of hitting the mark. 

To proceed methodically and in due order, it is proper to 
commence by investigating such general events as are open 
to consideration, and liable to have happened, or to happen, 
at the actual origin by birth ; since, from that origin, all 
things necessary to be investigated may be gathered ; as be+ 
fore stated. Yet, if a previous inquiry, by means of the 
ptimary origin by conception, should nevertheless be desired 
and undertaken, such an inquiry may still in some degree 
assist prognostication ; although only in regard to properties 
and qualities dispensed and imbibed at the time of conception. 


Chapter Ill. 
The Degree ascending. 
THERE frequently arises some uncertainty as to the pre- 
cise time of birth, and some apprehension lest it should not 
be accurately noted. In most cases, the actual minute of the 


Chap. IT.) PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 109 


hour, at which the birth happens, can only be ascertained by 
making a scientific observation, at the time, with an horo- 
scopical astrolabe* ; for all othet instruments, employed 

in ascertaining the hour, are almost always fallacious, al- 

though used by many persons with much care and attention. 

The clepsydra ¢, for instance, is subject to error, because 

the flow of the water will, from various causes, proceed ir- 

regularly : and the sun-dial is often incorrectly placed, and 

its gnomon often distorted from the true meridian line. To 

obviate the difficulty arising from the inaccuracy of these 

instruments, it seems highly necessary to present some 

method by which the actually ascending degree of the zo- 

diac may, be easily ascertained, in a natural and consistent 

manner, ; . 

And in order to attain this essential point, it 18 necessary 
first to set down the ordinary degree which, by the Doctrine 
of Ascensions{, is found near the ascendant at the pre- 
sumed hour. After this has been done, the new or full 
Moon, whichever it may be, that may take place next be- 
fore the time of parturition, must be obeerved: and, if a 
new Moon, it ‘will be necessary to mark exactly the degree of 
the conjunction of the two luminaries ; but, if a full Moon, 
the degree of that luminary only which may be above the 
earth during the parturition. After this, it must be observed 
what planets have dominion over the -said degree ; and their 
dominion depends always on the five following prerogatives, 





* It is, perhaps, needless to remark that modern improvements in 
science have superseded the use of this,,and other antient mstru- 
ments here mentioned. 

+ Although the “clepsydra,” or watewclock, was commonly used 
among the antients for various purposes, it appears, from Martian 
(a Latin writer, who lived about A. D. 490,) that there was also a clep- 

 sydra in special ase as an astrological engine. 

} “ The Doctrine of Ascensions,”—in allusion to the method of cal- 
culating the actual position of the ecliptic. 


-—— ee 


110 | PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. {Book III. 


viz. on triplicity, house, exaltation, terms, and phase or | 
configuration* ; that is to say, a planet, eligible to dominion, 
must be connected with the degree in question either by one, 
or more, or all of these prerogatives. 

If, therefore, there.may be found any one planet properly 
qualified in all or most of these prerogatives, the exact de- 
gree, which it occupies in that sign in which it may be po- 
sited during the parturition, is to be remarked; and it is 
then to be inferred that a degree of the same numerical de- 
nomination was actually ascending, at the precise time .of 
birth, in that sign which appears, by the Doctrine of Ascen- 
sions, to be nearest to the ascendantf. 

But when two planets, or more, may be equally qualified 
in the manner prescribed, it must be seen which of them may 
transit, during the parturition, a degree nearest in number to 
the ordinary degree shewn by the Doctrine of Ascensions to 
be then ascending ; and that said degree, nearest in number, 
is to be considered as pointing out the numerical denomina- 
tion of the degree actually ascending. And when the de- 
grees of two planets, or more, may closely and equally ap- 
proximate in numerical denomination to the ordinary degree 


found by the Doctrine of Ascensions, the degree of that 


planet which possesses further claims, by connection with 


_ the angles and by its own condition, i is to regulate the number 


of the actually ascending degree. 
It must however be observed, that if the actual distance of 


the degree, in which the ruling planet may be posited, from. 


the ordinary degree ascending, be found to exceed its distance 
from the ordinary degree of the mid-heaven ; the numerical 
denomination, found in the way above mentioned, is then to 
be considered ' as applicable to the actual. degree in culmina- 


® « Phase -or configuration.” Or, holding some authorized aspect 





' to the degrce in question. 


+ Or, on the aseendant. 





Chap. IV.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, 1] 
tion ; and the other angles are to be arranged in conformity 
therewith*. 
| Chapter IV. 
Distribution of the Doctrine of Nativities. 


Arter due attention to the preceding instructions, the doc- 


trine of genethliacal prognostication should be separately ° 


and distinctly considered, for the sake of order and per- 
spicuity, in its first, second, and successive divisions or heads 
of inquiry. It will thus be found to present a mode.of inves- 


tigation, at once practicable, competent, and agreeable to 


nature. 

One division is applicable only to certain circumstances 
established previously to the birth;. as, for instance, to those 
which concern the parents; another to circumstances, 
which may be established both before and after the birth ; as 
those respecting: brothers and sisters ; another to circum- 
stances actually occurring at the very time of birth, and im- 
mediately consequent thereupon : and this head of i Inquiry 


embraces various points, and is by no means simple: and the. 


last division relates to events liable to take place after the 
birth, at various periods, earlier or later ; and it involves a still 
more diversified theory. 

Thus, the questions to be solved, in regard to the actual 
circumstances of the birth itself, are, whether the production 
will be male or female; twins, or even more; whether it will 
be monstrous ; and whether it will be reared. 

The questions of the periods subsequent to the birth relate 
first to the duration of life, (which is distinct from the ques- 
tion of rearing), then to the shape and figure of the body, to 





* The precepts delivered i in this Chapter have obtained the name 
of Ptolemy’s Animodar : the term is probably , if it be nota 
corruption of the Latin words animum, or ant , dare, “giving 
‘* animation or life;” yet this meaning seems scarcely close enough, 







112 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. {Book II. 


the bodily affections, and to injuries or defects in the mem- 
bers. After these, further inquiry is instituted as to the 
quality of the mind, and the mental affections ; then, as to 
fortune, in. regard to rank and honours as well as wealth. 
In succession to these, the character of the employment or 
profession is sought out ; then, the questions relative to,mar- 
riage and offspring, and to consentaneous friendship, are to 
be considered ; then, that concerning travel; and, lastly, 
that concerning the kind of death which awaits the native. 
The question of death, although depending, in fact, upon the 
same influence as the question of the duration of life, seems 
yet to find its proper situation in’ being placed Jast in the 
series. | 

On each of the foregoing points of inquiry, the doctrine 
and precepts to be followed shall be thoroughly and succinctly 
detailed ; but all idle conceits, promulgated by many persons 
without any foundation capable of sustaining the test of 
reason, shall be utterly avoided, in deference to the only 
true agency, which is derived from primal Nature herself. It 
is only upon clearly effective influences that this treatise is 
established : and all matters, which are open to an autho- 
rized mode of inquiry by means of the theory of the stars, 
and their positions and aspects with regard to appropriate 
places, shall be fully discussed here; but the divination by 
lots and numbers, unregulated by any systematic causation, 
must remain unnoticed. 

The brief remarks, immediately following, are applicable 
to all cases, generally, and are now at once stated, to avoid 
the repetition of them under each particular division or head 
of inquiry. 

Firstly, notice must be taken of that place in the zodiac 
which correaponds, according to the scheme of the nativity, 
with the partignlar division of inquiry: for example, the 
place of the eens is adapted to questions comprised 


a 


o,.7* 


Chap. IV.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, 113 


under the head of employment or profession; and the Sun’s 
place to those relative to the concerns of the father. 

‘Secondly, after the proper place has thus been duly ascer- 
tained, the planets holding right of dominion there, by any 
of the five prerogatives hereinbefore mentioned, are to be 
observed ; and, if any one planet be found to be lord by all 
these prerogatives, that planet must be admitted as the ruler 
of the event liable to happen under that particular head of 
inquiry. If, however, two or three planets hold dominion, 
that one among them, which may have most claims to the 
place in question, must be selected as the ruler. 

Thirdly, the natures of the ruling planet and of the signs, 
in which itself and the place which it thus controuls may 
severally be situated, are to be considered as indicating the 
quality of the event. 

Fourthly, the proportionate vigour and strength, or weak- 
ness, with which the dominion is exercised, as exhibited 
either by the actual cosmical position of the ruling pla- 
net, or by its position in the scheme of the nativity, will 
point out to what extent and with what force the event will 
operate. And a planet is found to be cosmically powerful 
when in one of its own places*, or when oriental, or swift 
in course ; and it is strong in the scheme of the nativity, 
when transiting an angle or succedent house; especially 
those of the ascendant, or of the mid-heaven. But it is 
cosmically weaker, when not in one of its own places; or 
when occidental, or retarded in its course ; and in respect to 
the scheme of the nativity, it is _ ahen cadent from the 
angles. 

Lastly ; the general time, about which the event will take 
place, is to be inferred from the ruling planet’s matutine or 
vespertine position, in regard to the Sun and the ascendant, 
and from the circumstance of its being situated in an angle, 


Cn arena 
* In House, Triplicity, Exaltation, Term or Face. 
Q 


114 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book ITk. 


or a succedent house. As, if it be matutine, or in an angle, 
its influence operates earlier and more promptly; but, if 
vespertine or in a succedent house, later and more tardily. 
And, in reference to this point, the quadrant which precedes 
the Sun, and that which precedes the ascendant, together 
with the quadrants opposite to these, are oriental and ma- 
tuline ; and the other quadrants, following the former, are 
occidental and vespertine. 


@hapter V. 

The Parents. 
Unper each head of inquiry, the proposed investigation 
must be entered upon in the manner mentioned in the pre~ 
ceding chapter: and, to proceed in due order, the circum- 
stances relating to the parents require to be first disposed. of. 

In conformity to nature, the Sun and Saturn are allotted 
to the person of the father; and the Moon and Venus to that 
of the mother: and the mode in which these luminaries and 
planets may be found posited, with reference to each other, 
as well as to other planets and stars, will intimate the situation 
of affairs affecting the parents. 

Thus, for example, the degree of their fortune and wealth 
will be indicated by the doryphory*, or attendants of the lu- 
minaries. If the luminaries be accompanied, (either in the 
same signs in which themselves are placed, or in the signs 
next following,) by the benefics, and by such stars or planets 
as are of the same tendency as themselves, a conspicuous 
and brilliant fortune is presaged: especially, should the Sun 
be attended by matutine stars, and the Moon by vespertinet, 





* Acpupoa. This word has been heretofore rendered “ satellitivm” 
and “satellites”, but, as these terms do not seem sufficiently precisa 
in their meaning, and are already in use to signify the minor orbs 
which revolve round a principal planet, I have ventured to anglicise 
the Greek word; the usual signification of which isa “ body-guard.” 

+ Or, in other words, “should the stars, which attend the Sun, be 
“such as rise before him ; and those, which attend the Moon, such as 
“‘ rise after her.” 


Chap. V.] PTOLEMY’'S TETRABIBLOS. 115 


and these stars be also well established in the prerogatives 
before mentioned. “Likewise, if Saturn or Venus be matu- 
tine, and in proper face*, or in an angle, it foreshews the 
prosperity of either parent respectively, according to the 
schemef. If, however, the Juminaries hold no connection 
with the planets, and be unattended by any doryphory, the 
adverse fortunes of the parents, their humble state and obscu- 
rity, are then denoted; especially, if Saturn and Venus may 
not be favourably constituted. The parents are also subject- 
ed to a state of vicissitude, never rising above mediocrity, 
when the luminaries may have a doryphory of a condition 
or tendency foreign to their own: as, for instance, when 
Mars may ascend near in succession to the Sun, or Saturn to 
the Moon; or if the benefics be found constituted unfavout- 
ably, and not in conformity with their own natural condition 
and tendency. But should the part of fortune, as shewn hy 
the scheme of the nativity, be found in a favourable position, 
and in consonance with the doryphory of the Sun and Moon, 
the estate of the parents will then remain steady and secure. 
If, however, the position be discordant and adverse, or if the 
malefics compose the doryphory, the parents’ estate will be 
unproductive and even burthensome. 

The probable duration of the lives of the parents is to be 
inferred by means of other configurations. And, in the case 
of the father, a long life is presaged, if Jupiter, or Venus, be 
in any mode whatever configurated with either the Sun, or 
Saturn ; or, also, if Saturn himself make an harmonious con- 
figuration with the Sun; (that is to say, either by the con- . 
junction, the sextile, or the trine ;) provided such configura- 
tion be fully and strongly established and confirmed} :—and, 





* As deseribed in Chap. 26, Book 1. 

+ Saturn being applicable to the father, and Venus to the mother. 

} The Perugio Latin translation, of 1646, inserts here, “and pro- 
“* vided Saturn and the Sun are not impeded by being posited in un- 
“‘ fortunate or unsuitable places.” 


2 Rel i et 





116 PTOLEMY’S TETRABILBLOS. [ Book III. 


when not so established and confirmed, although it does not 
actually denote a short life, yet it will not then equally | presage 
a long life. 

If, however, the planets be not posited in the manner just 
described ; and if Mars be elevated above*, or ascend in suc- 
cession to the Sun, or to Saturn; or, even, should Saturn 
himself not be in consonance with the Sun, but configurated 
with it by the quartile or opposition, and if, when thus cir- 
cumstanced, both he and the Sun should be posited in ca- 
dent houses, it is then indicated that the father is liable to 
infirmities; but, if in angles or succedent houses, the father 
will live only a short life, and suffer from various bodily in- 
juries and diseases. The shortness of his life is particularly 
intimated by the position of the Sun and Saturn in the first 
two angles, viz. the ascendant and the mid-heaven, or in - 
their succedent houses; and his affliction by diseases and 
injuries, when they may be posited in the two other angles, 
the western and the lower heaven, or in the houses succedent 





© “ Elevated.” Moxon’s Mathematical Dictionary gives the fol- 
lowing definition of this astrological term. “ Elevated. A certain 
‘* pre-eminence of one planet above another; or, a concurrence of 
“ two to a certain act, wherein one being stronger, is carried above 
“ the weaker, and does alter and depress its nature and influence : 
*‘ But wherein this being elevated consists, there are several opinions ; 
‘“‘ some say when a planet is nearest the zenith, or meridian ; others 
‘“‘ will have it only that planet that is highest; or nearest to the Apo- 
‘“ geeon of his eccentric or epicycle. And Argol admits of all these, 
“and several other advantages, and thence advises to collect the 
“ several testimonies, and that that planet, who has most, shall be 
“said to be elevated above the other.” According to Whalley, 
Cardan’s opinion was that “that planet is most elevated which is 
“ more occidental and ponderous.” For myself, 1 conceive this opi- 
nion to be inaccurate, because, if Ptolemy meant to signify only the 
greater occidentality of the planet, he would (as in other instances) 
have used the word “preceding” instead of “ elevated above ;” and I 
incline to think, that greater proximity to the zenith is the truer, as 
well as more simple, meaning of the term “ elevated.” 


Chap. V.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 117 


thereto. And, if Mars be aspected to the Sun in the way 
before-mentioned, the father ‘will die suddenly, or receive in- 
jury in his face or eyes; but, should Mars be so aspected to 
Saturn, he will be afflicted with contractions of. the muscles 
or limbs, and with fevers and disorders proceeding from in- 
flammation and wounds ;—or even death may be the conse- 
quence. And even Saturn himself, if badly configurated 
with the Sun, will also inflict disease and death on the father, 
by inducing such particular disorders as are incidental from 
watery humour. . 

The foregoing observations are applicable to the father, 
and those which follow must be attended to in the case of 
the mother. | : 

Should the Sun be configurated, in any mode whatever, 
with the Moon or Venus, or, should Venus herself be har- 
moniously configurated with the Moon, either by the sextile, 
the trine, or the conjunction, the mother will live long. 

If, however, Mars be succedent to the Moon and Venus, 
or in quartile or opposition to them, or, if Saturn be simi- 
larly aspected to the Moon only, and both of them be 
void of course or retrograde, or cadent, adverse accidents and 
disease will attend the mother; should they, on the other 
‘hand, be swift in motion and placed in angles, they portend 
that her life will be short, or grievously afflicted. Their posi- 
tion in the oriental angles, or succedent houses, particularly 
denotes the shortness of her life; and, in those which are 
occidental, her affliction. In the same manner, should 
Mars be thus aspected to the Moon, (and should that Jumi-- 
nary at the same time be oriental) the mother’s sudden 
death, or some injury. in her face or eyes, will be produced: 
and, if the Moon be then occidental, death will be occasioned 
by miscarriage in parturition, by inflammation, or by wounds.. 
Such are the effects which ensue from these aspects made 
by Mars to the Moon; but, should he make them to | 
Venus, death will ‘then take place from fever, some latent 


118 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book itt. 


disease, or sudden sickness. Saturn’s aspect* to the Moon, 
when she is oriental, inflicts on the mother disease and death 
from extreme colds, or fevers; but, should the Moon be 
occidental, the danger arises from affections of the womb, or 
from consumption. — . 

In the investigation of all these circumstances, it is highly 
essential that the properties of the signs, in which are si- 
tuated the stars actuating the influence, should be also taken 
into consideration; and that, by day, the Sun and Venus 
should be principally observed; and, by night, Saturn and 
the Moon. 

If, however, after due attention has been paid to the fore- 
going points, a more specific inquiry should still be demanded, 
it will then become necessary to assume the place allotted to 
the paternal or maternal condition, as the case may be, for 
an horoscope or ascendant, in order to pursue the investiga- 
tion¢. And by this means, which in this respect will 
answer the purpose of a nativity, all other particulars con- 
cerning the parents may be viewed succinctly ; according to 
the general forms herein-after given, as adapted for practice 
and applicable to all events. 

In these and in all other cases, the mode, in. whieh the 
influences are commixed, must be carefully kept in view; 





* By the quartile or opposition, as before mentioned. 

t On this passage, Whalley remarks that “ Ptolemy teacheth, from 
“ the child’s nativity, to erect schemes for the father and mother, and. 
‘“¢ thence to give judgement, as if it were their proper nativities; the 
“ rule is this: If the nativity be diurnal, for the father, observe the 
“* degree the Sun is in, in the child's nativity ; and make that the de- 
“ sree ascending for the father ; and conformable to that, order the 
‘ eusps of ali the other houses. If for the mother, use Venus. -But if 
«« the nativity be nocturnal, for the father, take the place of Saturn; ~ 
“ and for the mother, that of the Moon.” Whalley adds, that *‘ what 
‘¢ in this chapter hath relation to the parents, is what shall happen to 
“ them after the nativity, and not before.” - 


Chap. V.] PTOLEMY'S TETRABIBLOS, L}9. 


" and it must be observed whether amy particular stars possess, 
in themselves alone, the operative cause, or whether others 
share dominion with them 5 and it is then to be seen which 
among them all are more powerful, and which of them take 
the lead in establishing the event: so that due inference 
may be drawn agreeably to their several natures. And should 
the several stars, which may happen to be combined in do- 
~ minion, be also equal in power, the diversity of their seyeral 
natures, and the admiature of qualities thence arising, must 
then be taken into consideration; and, by fairly weighing 
this various admixture, the nature and quality of the future — 
event may be apprehended. 

Stars, posited separately or at a distance from each other, 
distribute, at their appropriate times and periods, the events 
operated by each: thus the earlier events are brought about 
by stars which are more oriental than others, and the latter 
events by those which are more occidental. For it is indis- 
pensibly. requisite that the star, under the influence of which . 
some particular event is expected to happen, should be ori- 
giually* connected with the place to which the i inquiry, con- 
cerning that event, is allotted; and, if such connection should 
not have existed, no effect of any importance can possibly 
be produced ; because a stat does not exercise a vigorous 
infkoence, unless it was fully in cammunication at the be- 
ginning.. But, however, the time, at which the effect will 
take place, is further regulated by the relative distance of the 
star, governing the effect, from the Sun and the angles of 
-the wosld,.as well as by its primary position of dominion. 


Chapter VI. 
Brothers and Sisters. : 

Uwnkr this head of inquiry, a general and cursory investi- 
gation, only, can be performed: and an attempt to dive into 





* Or, at the actual time of nativity. 


120 PTOLEMY’S TETRABEBLOS. -  [ Book III. 


minute particulars would be fruitless, and would prove to be 
merely a vain search after things not open to discovery *. 

The place, whence inferences are drawn respecting brothers 
and sisters, is to be considered as being applicable only to chil-- 
dren of the same mother, and it is consequently, agreeably 
to nature, presumed to be the same as the maternal place ; 
viz. the sign occupying the mid-heaven; or, by day, that 
which contains Venus, and, by night, the Moon. This sign 
and its succedent are considered as indicative of the mother 
and her children, and the same place is therefore properly 
allotted to brothers and sisters. 

Hence, provided this place be configurated with the be- 
nefics, there will be several brothers and sisters: the number 
of them depending upon the number and positions of such 
benefic stars, whether in bicorporeal signs, or in signs of 
single form. 

If, however, the malefics should be in elevation over this 
place, or-be hostilely situated in opposition thereto, the bro- 
thers and sisters-will then be few in number ; and this few- 
ness especially follows when the malefics may surround the 
Sun. Should the hostile configuration be presented from the 
other angles +, and, particularly, if from the ascendant, Sa- 
turn will then represent the elder born; and Mars, by in- 
flicting death, will diminish the total number of brothers 
and sisters f. 





* In spite of this declaration of the author, it seems, by- Whalley’s 
note on this chapter, that Cardan maintained that the particular cir- 
cumstances, liable to affect the brothers and sisters, might be inferred 
by adopting, as an ascendant, the degree of the planet holding chief + 
dominion over the place of brethren, and erecting a scheme thereby ; 
in a mode similar to that allowed by Ptolemy in the case of the pa- 
rents. 

+ That is to say, from the angles in quartile (and therefore hostile 
also) to the mid-heaven, 

t The text ther it be necessary that Saturn and 


Chap: VI.] © PTOLEMY’S TRTRABIBEOS. 121 


_ Again, should the stars, which promise. brethren, be fa- 
vourably circumstanced as to their cosmical position, the 
brethren will be eminent and illustrious; but humble and 
obscure, if the cosmical position be of an adverse nature. 
If, also, the malefic stars should be in elevation over those 
which give brethren, the life of the brethren: will then be 
only of short duration. s 

Stars, constituted masculinely, represent brothers; those — 
femininely, sisters. The more oriental stars likewise repre+ 
sent the clder-born; and those which are more occidental, 
the younger. 

Moreover, should the stars, which give bfethnes: be harmo- 
niously configurated with that one which has dominion of 
the sign allotted to brethren, the brethren will be. mutually 
friendly and affectionate: and, if an harmonious configu- 
ration be also extended, by the same planets, to the part of . 
fortune, the brethren will live together in communion. But, 
if the stars, which give brethren, should, on the contrary, 
be in situations: unconnected with each other, or be in oppo- 
sition, the brethren will then live at variance, mutually 
practising enmity and fraud. 


Chapter VII. 
Male or Female. 


Arter the indications which regard brothers and sisters 
have been investigated by the foregoing rules, consonant 
with nature and reason; the actual native, or the person ta — 
whom the.scheme of nativity. is specially appropriated, de- 
. mands attention ;- and the first and most obvious inquiry 1s. 
whether the said native will be male or female. 





Mars should both be in the ascendant, in order to produce the effect 
described ; nor whether the same effect would not follow, if one of. 
them should be in the ascendant, and the other i in the occidental an- 
gle, or even.in some other se 

R 





122 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. —- (Book Lil. 


The consideration. of this question rests not on a single 
basis, nor can it be pursued in one éole direction only: it 
depends, on the contrary, upon the several situations of the 
two luminaries and the ascendant, and upon such planets as 
possess any prefopgatives in the places of those situations ; 
and all these circumstances should be specially observed at 
the time of conception, and, in a general manner alvo, at 
that of birth. 

Observation of the said three places, and of the mode in 
which the planets ruling them may be constituted, is wholly 


indispensible: it must be seen whether all, or most of them, 


_ may be constituted masculinely or fermininely; and prediction 

thusty of course, be regulated in conformity with their dispo- 
sition, so obsétved; as tending to produce a male or female 
birth. 

The masculine or feminine nature of the stars is to be 
distinguished in the manner already pointed cut in the comr- 
mencement of this treatise*. For instance, by the nature 
of the signs in which they are situated, by their relative 
position to each other, and also by their position towards 


the earth; as, when in the east, they are masculinely disposed, 


and, when in the west, femininely. Their relative position 
to the Sun also affords guidance in distinguishing them ; 
since, if they should be matutine, they are considered, to sig- 
nify the male gender; and if vespertime, the female. Thus, 
from the sex chiefly prevalent, as observed by these rules, 
that of the native may be rationally inferred. 


CHapeer VIII. 


Twins. 


WiItu respect to the probability of the birth of twins, or a’ 


greater number at once, the same places must be observed, 





* Vide Chapter 6, Book 1. 


Y 


Chap. VHI.] —- BYOLEMY’s: TRTBABIBLOS. 128 


as those mentioned ia the preneding chapter; that is to gay, 
the places of both luminaries and the ascendant. 

When tayo, ar all. three, of the said places may be sitpated. 
in bicorporeal signs, births of this kind will ocopr, in:son- 
sequence of the combination which then arises 3 especially, 
provided al] the planets, which controul those places, should 
also be similarly circumstanced: or although only some of 
them be pasited in bicerporeal signs, while the rest may be 
placed by two or more together, Begause even more than 
twins will -be bora, in a case wherein all the ruling places — 
may be in bicorporeal signs, most of the planets being, at 
the same time, posited in the same way, and configprated 
with them. ‘The number of children, however, to be pro» | 
duced at the birth, is ta be inferred from that planet which 
exercises the right of determining the number.*: and the: 
sex or sexes are to be predicted by means of the planets ip 
configuration with the Sun, Moon, and ascendant. 

And, should the position of the heavens be arranged so 
that the angle of the mid-heaven, and not that of the as- 
cendant, may be connected with the luminaries, there will, 
in that cage, be produced, almost always, tyins; and some- 
times even more. 

To speak, however, more particularly, three males will be 
born, as in the nativity of the Anactores ¢, when Saturn, 





* The planet here alluded to, seems to be that which may be con- 
nected with most of the ruling places. 

t [have looked in many other books for this word “ Anactores,” 
(plural of avaxrap), as designating three particular individuals born at 
the same birth; for which signification it is here used by Ptolemy ; 
but my search has been in vain. Cicero has, howevey, written a 
passage, in which a word, very nearly resembling it, occurs, and 
which would seem to relate to the yery persons alluded to by Ptolemy : 
viz. “The godship of the Dioscuri was established in various modes 
“among the Greeks, and applied to various persons. One set con- 

“‘ sisted of three persons, who were styled at Athens the Anactes ’ 


124 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book Uf. 


Jupiter, and Mars may be configurated with the places before 
appointed, in bicorporeal signs ; and three females, as in the- 
nativity of the Graces, when Venus and the Moon, with 
Mercury femininely constituted, may be configurated in like 
manner. When Saturn, Jupiter,.and Venus may be so: 
configurated, two males and one female will be born ; as in 
the nativity of the Dioscuri-* ; and, when Venus, the Moon 
and Mars may be so configurated, two females and one male ; 
as in the nativity of Ceres, Core and Liber f. - 

In casés of this kind, however, it most usually. happens 
that the ‘conception has not been complete, and that the 
children are born with some remarkable imperfections -or 
deformities. -And,-in some instances, owing to a certain 
concurrence of events, these numerous productions are quite 
extraordinary and amazing. 





“and were the sons of Jupiter, the most antient king, and Proser- 
“ pine; their several names were Tritopatreus, Eubuleus and Dio- 
“ nysius.” De Nat. Deor. lib. 3, cap.:21. 


XN 


* This is the second set of the Dioscuri, as stated by Cicero: they 


were the children of the third, or Cretan J upiter (the son of Saturn) 
and Leda; their names were Castor, Pollux and Helena.» Helena, 
however, is not mentioned by Cicero. 

+ Core isa name of Proserpine ; Liber, of Bacchus. And, although 
the mention here made of Ceres, Proserpine and Bacchus, as being 
the offspring of one and the same birth, does not aceord with the 
usual notion of the genealogy of these divinitics, it seems that 
Ptolemy did not so represent them without some reason. For, in 
cap. 24, lib. 2, De Nat. Deor., Cicero speaks of Liber as having 
been deified conjointly with Ceres and Libera, (another name of 
Proserpine) ; and adds, that “it may be understood, from the rites 
and mysteries of the worship, how the deification took place.” It 
appears also, by Davies’s notes on Cicero, that Livy and Tacitus both 
speak of the co-partnership in divinity exercised by Liber, Libera 
and Ceres. There is not, however, any occasion at present to dive 
deeper into the question of the generation of these deities; for our 
author has adverted to them only to point out that so many males or 
females will be produced at one birth, under certain configurations of 
_ the stars. 


Chap. 1X:J PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 125 


—- Ohapter IX. 
Monstrous or defective Births. 


Tm same places, as those pointed out in the two chapters 
last preceding, are again to be considered, in inquiring into 
the probability of a monstrous or defective birth. For it 
will be found that, at a birth of this description, the lumi- 
naries are either cadent from the ascendant, or else not in 
any manner configurated with it; while, at the same time, 
the angles * are occupied by the malefics. : 

It therefore becomes necessary, when such a position of 
the heavens may occur at the time of birth, to observe 
forthwith the preceding new or full Moon F and its ruler; as 
well as the rylers of the Juminaries at the said time of birth. 
_ For, if all the places, in which the rulers of the luminaries, . 
and in which the Moon herself and Mercury may be situated, 
at the birth, or, if most of those places should be totally in- 
conjunct and unconnected with the places of the said. pre- 
ceding new or full Moon and its ruler, the birth will then be 
monstrous. And if it should be further found, in addition 
to this absence of connection, that the luminaries may be 
also posited in quadrupedal or bestia] signs, and the two 
malefics in angles, the birth will in that case not be human. 
And should the luminaries, when so circumstanced, be not 
at all supported by any benefic planet, but only by malefics, 
the creature born will be wholly indocile,’ wild, and of evil 
nature: if, however, they should receive support from Jupi- 
ter or Venus, the offspring will then be like that of dogs or 
cats, or other creatures held in religious veneration and used 
in worship f: but, if Mercury support the luminaries, it will 





* Whalley says here, “chiefly the ascendant and mid-heaven.” 
+ Whichever might have been nearer in time. 
_ 1 It is perhaps superfluous to mention that the two kinds of ani- 
mals here named, (as well as many others) were venerated by the 
ct Si 


126 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIRLOS. [Boek IIT. 


resemble that of fowls, oxen, or swine, or, of other-animals 
adapted to the service of mankind. 

When the luminaries may he in signs of human shape, 
while other circumstances in the scheme of the nativity may 
exist. as before described, the creature born wil] then be - 
human, or will partake of human nature, although, it will 
still be defective in some peculiar quality. And, in 
order to ascertain the nature of that defect, the shape and 
form of the signs found on the angles occupied by the 
malefics, as well as. of those wherein the luminaries 
are situated, must be taken into consideration: and, if in 
this instance also, no benefic planet should lend support to 
any one of the prescribed places, the offspring produced will 
be utterly void of reason, and indeed indefinable*. If, how- 
ever, it should happen, that Jupiter or Venus give support, 
the defect will be veiled by a specious outward appearance, 
similar to that of hermaphrodites, and of those persons called 
Harpocratiacit, or others of like imperfections. And should 
Mercury also give support, in addition to that of Jupiter or — 
Venus, the offspring will then become an interpreter of ora- 
cles and divinations ; but, if Mercury support alone, it will 
be deaf and dumbf, although clever and angenious in its 


intellect. 
Chapter X. : 
Children not reared, 


TH question which now remains to be considered, in order 
to complete the investigation of circumstances taking place 





* The Greek says “ xnigmatical,” 

+ One Latin translation has rendered this word “ stammereps ;” and, 
as Harpocrates was the god of silence, Ptolemy has probably used the 
epithet to signify defect of speech. 

~ J“ Dumb.” The Greek is cdoyrey scapapgevoy, “ deprived of teeth,” and 
Allatius bas so translated it: but other translations render these 
wards by dumb, which, considering the nature of Mercury, seems 
their preferable signification. 





Chap, %.} PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, 127 
simultaneously with the nativity, or immediately consequent 
thereon, is, whether the child, then born, will or will not be 
reared, 

This inquiry is to be handled distinctly from that regard- 
ing the duration of life, although there ts an apparent cot- 
nection between them. The questions themeelves are, indeed, 
similar; for it is much the same thing to inquire whether 
the child will be nurtured, or how long it will live ; and the 
only distiggtion, between these two questions, arises frotn the 
differens"4smodes in which they are treated. For instance, 
the inquiry into the duration of life is to be pursued: only 
in cases wherein there is allotted to the native some space 
of time, not less in duration than a solar period; that is 
to say,a year. Therefore, since time ts also measured by 
smaller portions, such as months, days, and hours, and 
since the question, whether the native will or will not be 
reared, belongs to cases wherein some exuberance of evil 
_ Influence threatens speedy destruction, arid where life is not 
likely to endure throughout a whole year, the inquiry into 
the duration of life must consequently involve a more multi- 
farious consideration, than that which relates to rearing; 
which may be at once disposed of, in a more general and 
‘summary manner. , 

Thus, if either of the two luminaries be in an angle, and 
one of the malefics be either in coajunction with that lumi- 
nary, or else distant in longitude from each luminary, in an 
exactly equal space; so as to form the point of junction of 
two equal sides of a triangle, of which sides the two lumi- 
nartes form the extremities, while, at the same time, no de- 
nefic star may partake in the configuration, and while the 
rulers of the luminaries ary be also posited in places belong- 
ing to, or controuled by, the malefics ; the child, then born, 
will not be susceptible of nurture, but will immediately | 
perish, 

Should the configuration, made between the malefic planet | 


128 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IIT. 


and the luminaries, not exist precisely in the mode just men- 

tioned ; that is to say, should the said planet not be equally 

distant from both luminaries, so as to form the point of 
junction of two equal sides of a triangle ; yet should it then 

happen that the rays of two malefics may nearly approach the 

places of the.two Juminaries, casting an injurious influence 

either on both, or only one of them, and if both the said | 
. malefics be together succedent, or in opposition, to the lumi- 

naries, or if one of them be succedent, and the other in op- 

position, or even if only one may particularly afflict one of 

the luminaries, then, in any such case, no duration of life 

will be allotted to the child: for the supremacy of the power — 
of the malefics extinguishes the influence favourable to human 
nature, and tending to prolong existence. 

Mars is exceedingly pernicious when succedent to the Sun, 
and Saturn- when succedent to the Moon. ‘But a converse 
effect takes place when either of these planets may be in 
Opposition to the Sun or Moon, or in elevation above them ; 
for the Sun will then be afflicted by Saturn, ‘and the Moon 
by Mars ; and especially so, provided the said planets should 
have local prerogatives in the signs containing the lumina- 
ries, or in the sign on the ascendant. And, should a double 
Opposition exist, by the circumstance of the luminaries being 
placed in two opposite angles, and by the two malefics being 
each so posited as to be equally distant from each luminary, 
the child will be born almost, if not quite, dead. Neverthe- 
_” Jess, if the luminaries should be separating from, or be other- 
wise configurated with benefic planets, whose rays may be 
projected to parts preceding the said luminaries, the ‘child 
will then live.as many days, or hours, as there are’ degrees, 
numbered between the prorogator* and the nearest: malefic. 
a 

* A prorogator is either a luminary, planet, or a certain degree of 
the zodiac, which determines the duration of life, or the time of the 
accomplishment of any event: it is hereafter fally treated‘ of in the 


x 


Chap. XI] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS,~ 129 


If malefics should cast their rays to parts preceding the 
luminaries, and benefics to parts following them, the child 
will be abandoned at its birth ; but will afterwards meet with 
adoption, and will live. Yet, if the malefics should be ia 
elevation above those benefics which are thus configurated, 
the child, so adopted, will lead a life of misery and servitude : 
if, on the contrary, the benefics should be in elevation, then 
whoever may adopt the deserted child will supply the place 
of its parents. And, provided a benefic planet should either 
ascend with, or near in succession to the Moon, or be apply- 
ing to her, and one of the malefics be occidental, the child’s 
own parents will, in that case, take it again under their pro+ 
tection. . 

Rules similar to the foregoing are to be observed, when 
more than one child is born ; for, if any one of those pla- 
nets, which may be configurated towards the production of 
two, or even more, children, should be. under the west, the 
children will be born half dead, or deformed, and imperfect 
in body. And, if the planet so situated should also be be- 
neath the malefics, the children will not be susceptible of - 
nurture, or their life will be of the shortest span. 


Chapter XI. 
The Duration of Life. 
OF all events whatsoever, which take place. after birth, the 
most essential is the continuance of life: and as it ts, of 
course, useless to consider, in cases wherein the life of a 
child does not extend to the period of one year, what other 
events contingent on its birth might otherwise have subse- 
quently happened, the inquiry into the duration of life con- 


e 





13th Chapter of this Book ; which shews that, in the instance now men- 
tioned, it woutd be a laminary, either in the sscendant, or im the mid- 
heaven, ; 

8 





130 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IIf. 


séquently takes precedence of ail other questions, as to the 
events subsequent to the birth. ; 
The discussion of this inquiry is by no means simple, nor 
easy of execution ; it is conducted in a diversified process, 
by means of the governance of the ruling places. And the 
method now about to be laid down seems, of all others, the 
most consonant. with reason, and with nature: because the 
influence of the prorogatory places, as well as of the rulers 
of those places, and the disposal of the anzretic* places or 
stars, perform the whole operation of regulating the duration 
of life. Each of these influences is to be distinguished in 
the mode pointed out in the chapters immediately ensuing. - 


@dapter XII. 

The Prorogatory Places. | 
Firsty, those places, only, are to be deemed sacrriluiy: 
to which the future assumption of the dominion of pro- 
rogation exclusively belongs. These several places are the 
sign on the angle of the ascendant, from the fifth degree 
above the horizon, to the twenty-fifth degree below it ;—-the 
thirty degrees in dexter sextile thereto, constituting the 
eleventh house, ‘called the Good Demon ;—also the thirty 
degrees in dexter quartile, forming the mid-heaven above the 
earth ;—those in dexter trine making the ninth house, called 
God ;—and lastly, those i in opposition, belonging to the an- 

gle of the west. 

Secondly, among these places, the degrees which consti- 
tute the mid-heaven are entitled to preference, as being of a 
more potent and paramount influence :—the degrees in the 
ascendant are next in virtue ;—then the degrees in the ele- 
venth house succedent to the mid-heaven;—then those in the. 
angle of the west ;—and, lastly, those in the ninth house, 
which precedes the mid-heaven. 


ne ee ee ee ee 
* The epithet anaretic is a term of art, adopted from the Greek, 
signifying fatal, (OF destructive. 


rhap. XIII.]  —- PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOs. 13} 


- No degrees under the earth are, in any manner, eligible 
to the dominion now in question; except such only as 
enter into light actually above the succedent, or, in other 
' words, with the ascendant. And any sign, although it may 
be above the earth, is still incompetent to partake in this 
dominion, if it be inconjunct with the ascendant: hence 
the sign which precedes the ascendant, and constitutes the 
twelfth house (called that ‘of the Evil Demon), is incom- 

petent ; and not only for the above reason, but also because 
' jt is cadent, and because the beams cast by the stars posited 
therein, towards.the earth, are impaired by the thick and 
dark exhalations arising from the earth’s vapours, which 
produce an unnatural colour and magnitude in the appear- 
ance of stars so posited, confusing, and in some measure 
annihilating, their beams. © ° 

Thus far with regard to the places of prorogation, — 


Chapter XIII. | 

The Number of Prorogators, and also the Part of Fortune. 
Arter due attention has been given to the instructions in 
the preceding chapter, the Sun, the Moon, the Ascendant, 
and the part of Fortune, are to be considered as the four 
principally liable to be elected to the office of prorogator ; 
and their positions, together with those of such planets as 
rule in the places of their positions, are to be observed. 
The part of Fortune is ascertained by computing the num- 
ber of degrees between the Sun and the Moon; and it is 
placed at an equal number of degrees distant from the 
ascendant, in the order of the signs. It is in all cases, both 
-by niglit and day, to be so computed and set down, that the 
Moon may hold with it the same relation as that which the 
Sun may hold with the ascendant ; and it thus becomes, as 
it were, a lunar horoscope or ascendant*, 

* The Latin translation, printed at Perugio in 1646, has here the 
‘following passage in addition ; “ But it must be seen which luminary 


132 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IIf. 


Among the candidates for prorogation, as beforementioned, 
by day the Sun is to be preferred, provided he be situated in 
a prorogatory place; and, if not, the Moon; but if the 





““ may follow the other in the succession of the signs ;. for if the Moon 
‘‘ should so follow the Sun, the part of Fortune is also to be num- 
‘* bered from the horoscope or ascendant, according to the succession 
“of the signs. But if the Moon precede the Sun, the part of For- 
‘“‘ tune must be numbered from the ascendant, contrary to the suc~- 
** cession of the signs.” 

There is a long dissertation on the part of Fortune, in Cooper's 
Piacidus, from pp. 308 to 318; and, among the directions there given 
for computing its situation, the following seem the most accurate 
and simple : viz. “In the diurnal geniture, the Sun’s true distance 
‘‘ from the east is to be added to the Moon’s right ascension, and in 
“‘ the nocturnal, subtracted ; for the number thence arising will be 
“‘ the place and right ascension of the. part of Fortune : and it always 
“has the same declination with the Moon, both in number and 
“ name, wherever it is found. Again, let the Sun’s oblique ascen- 
“ sion, taken in the ascendant, be subtracted always from the oblique 
“ ascension of the ascendant, as well in the day as in the night, and 
“‘ the remaining difference be added to the Moon’s right ascension ; 
*‘ the sum will be the right ascension of the part of Fortune, which 
“« will have the Moon’s declination.” It is shewn also by this disser- 
tation, that the situation of the part of Fortune must be necessarily 
confined to the lunar parallels; that it can but rarely be in the 
ecliptic ; and that its latitade is ever varying. Cooper also adds, 
from Cardan’s Commentaries on the ‘Tetrabiblos, that “if the Moon 
‘is going from the conjunction to the opposition of the Sun, then the 
“ Moon follows the Sun, and the part of Fortune is always under 
“the Earth, from the ascendant; but if the Moon has passed the 
** opposition, she goes before the Sun, and the part of Fortune is 
“before the ascendant, and always above the earth.” This remark 
of Cardan’s is, in effect, exactly equivalent ta what is stated in the 
additional passage inserted in the Perugio Latin. translation, and 
given above. 

In the Primum Mobile of Placidus (Cooper’s translation, p- 45), 
the following remark and example are given :—‘ The paxt of Fortune 
‘‘ 3 placed according to the Moon's distaace from ihe Sua ; and you 


Gap, XIII] ProueMy’s THTRABIRLOS. 138 


Moon, also, should not be so situated, then that planet is to 
be elected which may have most: claims to dominion, in 
reference to the Sun, the antecedent new Moon, and the 
. ascendant; that is to say, when such planet may be found 
to have dominion over any one of the places where these are 
situated, by at least three prerogatives, if not more; the 
whole number being five. If, however, no Planet should 
be found so eucumateores) the Ascendant is then to be 
taken. 

By night, the Moon is to be elected as prorogator, pro- 
vided, in like manner, she should be in some prorogatory 
place; and if she be not, the Sun: if he also be not in any 
prorogatory place, then that planet which may have most 
rights of dominion in reference to the Moon*, and the an- 
tecedent full Moon and the.part of Fortune. But, if there 
be no planet claiming dominion in the mode prescribed, 
the Ascendant must be taken, in case a new Moon had last 
preceded the birth ; but, if a full Moon, the part of For- 
tune, - 

If the two luminaries, and also some ruling planet of ap- 
propriate condition, should be each posited in a prorogatory 

\ . 





<< must observe what rays the Moch has to the Sun, for the latter 
“‘ ought to have the same, and with the same excess or deficiency, 
‘‘ as the part of Fortune to the horoscope. As the Moon is to the 
“ Sun, so is the part of Fortune to the boroscope; and as the Sun is 
“ to the horescope, so is the Moon to the part of Fortane. So, in 
“ the nativity of Charles V, the Moon applies to the ultimate sextile 
to he Soe; ut vee a deficiency of 7° 45’: I subtract the 7° 45/ 

*‘ from 5° 34’ of Scorpio, the ultimate sextilo to the horoscope, and 
“‘ the part of Fortune is placed in 26° 9! of Libra.—-N.B. In this na- 
tivity, according to Placidus, the Sun fs in the second bouse, in 
14° $0’ of Pisves; the Moen in the ascendant, in 6° 45° of Capricorn ; 
the ascendant is 5° 84’ of Capricomm ; and eae Reet ree 
the ninth house, in 28° 9 of Libra, - 

* According to her position in the scheme of the nativity. 





134 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book Ill. 


place, then, provided one luminary may be found to occupy 
some place more-important and influential than the others, 
that luminary must be chosen ; but should the ruling planet 
occupy the stronger place, and have prerogatives of domi- 
nion suitable to the conditions of both luminaries, the pla- 
net must then be preferred to either of them*. 


Chapter XIV. 
Number of the’ Modes of Prorogation. 


WHEN the prorogator has been determined as above directed, 
it 1s also necessary to take into consideration the two modes 
’ .of prorogation ; one into succeeding signs, under the pro- 
jection of rays, as it is called; and, when the prorogator 
_ may be in an oriental place, that is to say, in any place 
between the mid-heaven and the ascendant, this mode only 
is to be used. The other mode extends into signs preceding 
the prorogator, according to what is called horary propor- 
tiont ; and, in cases when the prorogator may be situated 
in any place receding from the mid-heaven, or, in other 
words, between the mid-heaven and_ the angle of the west, 
both modes of prorogation are to be adopted. * 

It is next to be observed, that certain degrees are anretic ; 





* Placidug, in remarking on the nativity of Jobn di Colonna, after 
stating his opinion that it is an error to suppose that a malign influ- 
ence to the horoscope (when the horoscope has not the primary sig- 
nification of life) is anzretic, says, that “the order and method which 
.“ Ptolemy lays down for the election of a prorogator are quite ab- 
«¢ surd, unless life be at the disposal. of a sole prime significator only.” 
He proves by other arguments also, and by instances of the fact, that 
‘“‘ one only signifies life, elected according to Ptolemy's method.” 
(Cooper’s translation, p. 184.) 

. S Horary proportion.” So the Perugio Latin of 1646; the Greek 
word, however, is sgiaay, which seems to be compounded of ae. 
and see; and, if so, the literal signification would be “ extraction 
“. of hours.” 


® 


Chap. XIV.] | PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. | 135 


though, in the prorogation made into signs preceding, the 
only degree which is strictly anzretic is that of the western 
horizon ;—and it becomes so because it obscures the lord of 
life ;—while other degrees, of stars meeting with or. testifying 
to the prorogator, both take away, from and add to the ag- 
gregate amount of the prorogation, which would otherwise 
continue until the descension or setting of the prorogator. 
Of these last-mentioned degrees, however, there are none 
properly aneretic ; since they are not borne to the proro- 
gatory place, but, on the contrary, that place is carried to 
their positions*. In this manner the benefics increase the 
prorogation, but the malefics diminish it; and Mercury 
assists the influence of either party with which he may be 
configurated. The amount of the increase or diminution 
is indicated by the degree, in which each star, so operating, 
is exactly situated ; for the number of years will depend 





we 


wee ee 


. By the apparent motion of the planetary system. On this pas- | 


sage, Placidus has the following observations : “ In directing the sig- 
“‘ nificator to the west, you must consider what stars or mundane 
“‘ rays are intercepted between the significator and the west; if for- 


“ tunate, add their arc to the significator’s are of direction to the | 


“west; if unfortunate, subtract it from the same, and it will give 
“ the arc of direction, augmented or diminished according to Ptole- 
“ my.—How largely and differently authors have spoken of this 
“« direction of the significator'to the west, putting various construc- 
“ tions on the words of Ptolemy, is known to every one. See Car- 
‘¢ dan in his Commentaries, Maginus in Prim. Mob. and the Use of 
“* Legal Astrology in Physic, c. viii, where he delivers the sentiments 
“of Naibod. Argol censures wholly this doctrine of Ptolemy’s, of 
-“ directing the. moderator of life to the west, as vain and useless ; 


“but. say it is worthy of remark, and‘ altogether conformable ‘to ' 


“ trath; because then the rays and jntermediate stars of the malign 
“ only lessen the arc of direction to the west, and do not destroy 
* life, when, by a right direction, the moderator of life. does not re- 
“ main at the same time with the malignant planet: for, should this 
“ happen, they kill, without any manner of doubt.” (Cooper's trans- 
lation, pp. 106 and 108.) . 





‘36 | PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. (Book Tit. 
upon, and correspond with, the horary times* proper to_ 
each degree; and if the birth be by day, care must be taken 
to calculate the diurnal horary times ; if by night, the noc- 
turnal. These directions are to be understood as applicable 
to instances wherein the degrees in question may be inthe ° 
ascendant ; if farther advanced, a deduction proportionate 
to the distance is to be made, unless they should be on the 
~ occidental horizon, in which - there can be no remainder. 

But, m the prorogation made into succeeding signs, the 
places of the malefics, Saturn and Mars, are aneretic, whe- 
ther meeting the prorogator bodily, or by emission of rays 
in quartile, from either side, or in opposition : they are also 
sometimes aneeretic, by a sextile ray, if in a sign of equal 
power, obeying or beholding the sign of the prorogator. 
And even the mere degree, in signs following, in quar- 
tile with the prorogatory place, as also the degree in sextile, 
if badly afflicted, which ie sometimes the case in signs of 
long ascension, and, still further, the degree in trine, if in 
signs of short ascension, are all anzretic: so also is the 
. Sun’s place, should the Moon be prorogatory. But, al- 
though the meetings, which occur in the course of proroga- 
tion thus made, have, respectively, some of them an aneretic, 
and others a preservative, power, in consequence of their 
occurring by means of an actual transmission to the pro- 
rogatory placef ; yet their aneeretic tendency is not always | 
effectual, but only in cases where the places, so. brought to 
the prorogatory place, may be badly afflicted. For should 
those places be situated within the terms of a benefic, the 
operation of their anseretic degree becomes impeded ; and it 
will likewise be impeded, if either of the benefics should cast 





| © Forary times.” These are the number of equaforial degrees 
which any degree of the zodiac may appear, in a certain latitude on 
the carth, to transit ia an equatorial hour. 

t By the apparent motion of the planetary system. 


Chap. XIV.]  - PFOLRMY’3 TETRARFBLOS, 137 
'@ ray in quartile, trine, or opposition®, to the said anzretic 
degree itself, or to some other degree near in succession, and 
not farther distant from it than twelve degrees, if the benefic 
be Jupiter ; nor than eight, if Venus: the like impediment 
will also subsist, if both the prorogator and its opponent} 
should be bodies{, and not have the same latitude. 
Therefore, whenever there may be found two or more 
conflicting configurations, auxiliary on the one hand, and 
hostile on the other, due observation must be made to as- 
certain which party surpasses the other, in power as well as 
in number. The pre-eminence in number. will be, of course, 
obvious, ‘from the greater number§ on one side than on the 
other; but, for pre-eminence in power, it must be seen whe- 
ther the stars, auxiliary or hostile as the case may be, are, on 
the one side, in places appropriate to themselves, while they 
are not so on the other ; and especially whether those on the 
one side may be oriental, and those on the other occidental. 
It is also to be observed, in all cases, that not any one of such 
stars, whether hostile or auxiliary, is to be left out of the 
present calculation, on account of its casual position under 





* In reference to this passage, Placidus, in speaking of the death 

of Octavian Vestrius of Rome, has these words: “ the Moon is found 

. “in £ parallel declination of Mars, and Saturn with the opposition of 
“Mars; the sextile of Jupiter to the Sun could give no assistance, 


‘“ because Jupiter is cadent, and the ray soxtile is very weak, espe- - | 


“ gially when it is the principal ray: for which reason, Ptolemy, in the 
“ chapter of Life, when he mentions the planets that are able to save 
“in the occourses of the infortunes, does not name the sextile, but 
‘the quartile, trine, and opposition; because the sextile ray is feeble, 
“ narticularly when it is less than 60°: neither could Venus assist, as 
“she was cadent from the house, and in a sign inimical to the Sun,” 
&c. (Cooper’s Translation, p. 86.) 

+ Literally, and perhaps more properly, “ its meeter.” 

{ That is to say, orbs, in contradistinction to prorogations made by 
aspects or degrees merely. 

§ Of the stars aid places brought into configuration. 

T 





138 PTOLEMY'S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IIT. 


the sun-beams*. This rule must be particularly attended 
to, because, even though the Moon be not prorogatory, the — 
solar place itself becomes anzretic, if shackled by the simul- 
taneaus presence of a malefic, and not restored to freedom of 
operation by any benefic. 

The number of years, depending on the distances between 
the prorogatory and anaretic places, cannot be always ga- 
thered simply and at once from the ascensional timest of 
_ each respective degree; but only in cases when the ascend- 
ant itself, or some other specific degree or body, actually 
ascending in the oriental horizon, may possess the proroga- 
tion. For, if it be desired to calculate agreeably to nature, 
every process of calculation that can be adopted must be di- 
rected to the attainment of one object; that is to say,-to 
ascertain after, how many equatorial timest the place of the 
succeeding body, or degree, will arrive at the position pre- 
occupied at the birth by the preceding body, or degree: and, 
as equatorial time transits equally both the horizon and the 
meridian, the places in question§ must be considered, in 
respect of their proportionate distances from both these ; 
each equatorial degree|| being taken to signify one. jolat 
year. ‘ 

In conformity with the foregoing remarks, when it may 





* ‘Whalley’s translation of this passage isin direct contradiction to - 

the sense: and even that of Allatius, as well as other Latin ones, are 
(if strictly correct) confused in their meaning. 
. t “ Ascensional times.” These are, in other words, the number of 
degrees of the equator, equivalent to a certain number of zodiacal 
degrees, ascending in any particular latitude. They are also other- 
wise called the oblique ascension of such zodiacal degrees. 

} “ Equatorial times” here signify degrees of the equator, by which 
all time is measured. . 
§ That is to say, of the preceding and of the succetding pa or 

degree. 

|} Which may be intercepted in the arc Between them. 





Chap. XIV.] : proLEMy’s TETRABIBLOS. - «180 


happen that the prorogatory.and preceding place may be 
actually on the oriental horizon, it wil] be proper to reckon, 
at once, the ascensional times which may intervene until the 
meeting of the degrees; because, after the same number of 
. equatorial times, the anzreta will arrive at the prorogatory 
place ; that is to say, at the oriental horizon. Should the 
prorogatory place be found on the meridian, the whole num- 
ber of degrees by right ascension, in which the whole inter- 
cepted arc will transit the meridian, must then be taken. . 
And if the prorogatory place be on the occidental horizon, 
the number of descensions, in which every degree of the 
distance will be carried down, (or, in other words, the num- 
ber of ascensions, in which their opposite degrees will 
ascend), is in that case to be reckoned*. 

When, however, a prorogatory and preceding place may — 
not be situated on any one of the three aforesaid points, but 
in some intermediate station, it must be observed that other 
times{ will then bring the succeeding place to the preceding 
one; and not the times of ascension or descension, or transit 
of the mid-heaven, as above spoken of. For any-places 
whatever, which have one particular position, on the same — 
degree, in regard to the horizon and meridian, are alike and 
identical. This is the case, for instance, with all places 
lying on any one of those semicircles which are drawn 
through the arcs of the meridian and horizon ; and each of 
these semicircles (all of which have position at the same 
equal distance from each other) marks one temporal hour] ; 

rrr 

* This number.is that of the oblique descensional times of the in- 

tercepted are, or of the oblique ascensional times of the arc opposite 

to it.—The whole of the instructions in this paragraph are es eoxem- 
- plified in the following Chapter. 

t Or, times to be reckoned in another manner. 

t On this passage, there has been founded, (to use Whalley’s words) 
“ what we call Mundane Parallels, or parallels in the world. And, 
“as zodiacal parallels are equal distances from the tropical or equi- 


| 


BO PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, [Book TiT. 
and, as the time occupied in proceeding through the places* 
above described, and arriving at the same position of the 
horizon and meridian, is rendered unequal to and different 
from the time of transits in the zodiac ; so, also, the transits 
of other spaces are made, agreeably to their position, m time | 
again distinct from this. 

There is, however, a method by which the sraneHisd of 
time, occupied in the progress ef a succeeding place to a 
prorogatory and preceding place, in whatever position, whe- 
ther oriental, meridianal, or occidental, or any other, may be 
easily calculated. It is ag follows :— 

When it has been ascertained what degree of the zodiac 
is on the mid-heaven, as also which are the preceding and 





“‘ woctial circles, 30 mundane pataNels are a like equal distance from 
“the horizontal or meridianal points or circles. And as zodiacal 
‘‘ parallels are measured by the zodiacal circle, so those nrundaae pa- 
“ rallels are measured by the diurnal or nocturnal arcs: and just so 
“ong as the Sun or any other planet is, in proceeding: from the cusp 
* ofthe tivelfth Fouse to the cusp of the tenth, the same Sun or other 
“ planct will be in proceeding ‘from ‘the cusp of the tenth tothe cusp of 
“the eighth Howse. And ¢he distance between San-risiag and 
*‘ sotting, is the diarnal arc which the meridian euts in ‘two equal 
“parts. In directions, these mundane parallels have a twofold cen- 
“ sideration: first, simple; secondly, according to the rapt me- 
“tion of the earth, or the primum mobile : all which have been largely 
‘“ explained by the learned Monk, Piacidus,” &c. That Author has 
‘eentainly ‘stated, m one of his Theses, that “ those seats, or parts of 
“the cirole, are to be received, in which the stars, having a different 
‘declination, effect equal temporal hours,’(p. 22,Cooper’s Translation.) 
and he has fully exemplified this principle in other parts of his “ Pri- 
mum Mobile ;” but Ptolemy tere speaks only of one of the semivircles 
hetwoen the horizon and meriditin, without reference to any other semi-. 
clrete, correspomling in-distance ‘from the horizon and mid-heaven ; 
and all that he has said on the subject amounts only to this, that the 
prorogution is conrpteted ‘when the ‘succeeding place atrives at the 
peal semicircte on which the preceding place had been posited. 

* ‘The ascomtant, mid-heaven, ana western horizon ; as rhentioned - 
in the precoding ‘paragraph. 


Chap. XIV.] PTOLEMY'S TETRABIBLOS. 141 


" succeeding degrees, the period of whose meeting is to he 


calculated, the position of the preceding. degree, and its 
distance in temporal hours from the meridian, are next to 
be noted ; because any part of the zodiac, on becoming dist- 
ant from the meridian in the same temporal hours, must fall 
on the same individual semicircle*. For ascertaining this 
distance, the number of ascensions, im a right sphere, found 
in the intermediate space between the said preceding degree 
and the mid-heaven, either above or under the earth, is to 
be divided by the number of the diurnal or nocturnal horary 
times of the said preceding degree: for instance, if that 
degree be above the earth, by its diurnal horary times ; and, 
by. its nocturnal, if it be under the earth. It is then to be 
discovered in what number of equatorial times‘the succeed- 
ing degree will be distant from the same meridian, by as 
many sifnilar temporal hours as those by which the preced- 
ing degree is distant from it. And, to effect this, the hours ° 
in question must be noted, and it must first be observed, by 
the right ascensions agai, how many equatorial times the 
succeeding degree; at ‘its original position, is distant from 
the degree on the mid-heaven 5 and then it must be seeri 
how many equatorial times it will be distant, on coming 
to the preceding degree’s distance in temperal hours from the © 
said mid-heaven: this will be found, by multiplying those 
hours by the succeeding degree’s horaty times; diurnal, if 


. the Future position be above the earth, and nocturnal if un- 


ders and the difference in amount, of these two distances, 
4n equatorial = will present the number of years inquir- 


| “CBaprer XV. 
: : Exemplification. _ 


In order t6 exemplify. the foregoing instructions, let-the first 


ed for. 


point of Aries be supposed ag the preceding place, and the — 





* Vide Note t, pp: 199, 140. 





142 © PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book III. 


first point of Gemini the succeeding ; and let the latitude of 
the country, to which the operation relates, be such as will 
cause the longest day to consist of fourteen hours* ; and 
where the horary magnitude of the beginning of Gemini 
will be about seventeen equatorial timest. , 

Let the first point of Aries be first placed on the ascend- 
ant, so that the beginning of Capricorn may be on the mid- 
heaven above the earth, and the first point of Gemini’ be 
distant from the said mid-heaven 148 equatorial timesf. 
Now, since the first point of Aries is distant six temporal 
hours from the mid-heaven above the earth, the times of 
that distance will be found, by multiplying the said six hours 
by the seventeen equatorial times of the horary magnitude of 
the first point of Gemini, to be 102§. The whole sum of 
the distance to the mid-heaven above the-earth, is 148 times ; 
and as 148 times exceed 102 by 46, the succeeding place will 
consequently devolve into the preceding place after 46 times; 
(being the amount of the said excess, and also, as near as 
possible, the amount of the times of ascension of Aries and 
Taurus||), since, in this instance, the prorogatory place is 
established in the ascendant. 





* This, in the Northern Hemisphere, would be the latitude of Alex- 
andria, (where Ptolemy flourished) or, in his own words, that of the 
3d Climate, passing through Lower Egypt, numbered 30° 22’— Vide 
extracts from the Tables of the Almagest, inserted in the Appendix. 

t This is the magnitude of the diurnal temporal hour of the first 
pant of Gemini in the latitude prescribed. 

} By right ascension, as shewn by the Extract, inserted in the Ap- 
pendix, from the Table of Ascensions in the Almagest. The exact 
distance, however, according to that Table, is 147° 44/. 

§ Or rather, according to the Table, 102° 39. 

|| That is to say, of their oblique ascension, which is here required 
to be reckoned; because the prorogatory and preceding place is in 
the ascendant. Vide p. 139, and Note + in p. 188,—And the first 
point of Gemini, on arriving at the ascendant, will be distant from 
the mid-heaven 102° 39’ by right ascension; the 13th degree of 
Aquarius being then in culmination in the prescribed latitude. The 


a 


\ 


Chap. XV.] PTOLEMY’S ‘TETRABIBLOS, 143 


In like manner, let the first point of Aries be next placed 
on the mid-heaven, culminating ; so that the first point of 
Gemini, in its first position, may be distant from the said 
mid-heaven 58 equatorial times*. Now, as it 1s required to 
bring the first point of Gemini, in its second position, to the 
mid-heaven, the whole distance is to be reckoned, viz. 58 
times, in which Aries and Taurus pass the mid-heaven ; 
because, again, the prorogatory place wae culminatingt. 

In the same way, let the first point of Aries be descend- 
ing} ; so that the beginning of Cancer may occupy the mid- 
heaven, and the first point of Gemini precede the mid- 


heaven at the distance of 32 equatorial times§. There-  - 


fore, as the first point of Aries is on the west, and again 
distant six temporal hours from the meridian, let these six _ 
hours be multiplied by the seventeen times ; which will pro- 
duce 102, making the sum of the distance]| of the first point 
of Gemini, at its future descension from the meridian]. ° 
But, as the first point of Gemini, at its first position, was 
already distant from the meridian 32 times; which number 
102 exceed by 70; it will consequently arrive at its. de- 
scensjon after 70 times, the amount of the excess ; in. which, 
space Aries and Taurus will have descended, and their op- 
posite signs Libra and Scorpio arisen**. 
Oblique ascensions in the latrtude 30% 22’ N. are also shewn in 
the extract referred to in the preceding note: and it thereby pet, 
that. Aries and Taurus ascend in 45° 5’, instead of 46°. 

* Or rather, 57° 44’ — by right ascension.—Vide extract abaya 
referred to. 

t Vide p. 189. 

} Or on the cusp ofthe 7th House. 

’ § Or, rather, $2° 16-—by right ascension again.—Vide extract as 
before. 

| By right ascension.—The amount according to the Table is, 
however, 102° 39’, as before'stated. 

@{ On which the 10th degree of Virgo will then be posited. = - 
. ** By oblique descension and ascension: vide P. seoeee Table — 
shews the amount to neice 23’, 


LED 
See oe es Oooo - ~~ oe aie ae Pe = = 
. 


a4 PTOLEMY's TETRaBIIes. j|§§§ [Beok FIT. 

Again, let the first point ef Anes have another posuen, 
pot im any angie*, but, for imstzmce, at the distance of 
three temporal honors past the meridian; so that the 1th 
degree of Tasrus may be on the mid-beaven, and the frst 
poant of Gemini be approaching the mid-heaven, at the 
distance of thirteen equatorial times. The seventeen trams 
mast, therefore, be again multiplied by the three hours, and 
the first point of Gemini, at its second position, will i 
found to be past the meridian, at the distance of 51 timest. 
The distances of 13 times of the first position and 51 tines 
of the second position are then both to be taken; and they 
will produce 64 times. In the former instances the prore- 
gatory place performed in the same succession ; viz. occn— 
pying 46 times in coming to the ascendant, 58 in comme 
to the mid-heaven, and 70 in coming to the west; so thut 
the present number of times, depending on the imtenmediate 
“position between the mid-heaven and the west, and being 
64, also differs from each of the other numbers, in proper- 
tion tothe three hours difference of position. For, in the © 
other cases which proceeded by quadrants}, according to the 
angles, the times progressively differed by twelve, but, in the 
present case of a minor distance of three hours, they differ 
by six§. 

There is, however, another method which may be used, 
and which is still more simple ; for instance, should the 
preceding degree be on the aseendant, the following inter- 





* In reference to p. 139, and note + in the same page. 

+ The 18th degree of Cancer being then in eulmination. 

} Or semi-diurnal arcs, each equal to six temporal hours. 
. & The amount of the progressive difference of the times of promo 
gation, as here mentioned, is of course only applicable to the perallel 
of declination of the first point of Gemini, in the latitude befere 
quoted. It must necessgrily vary in all other parallels of declinatien, 
and also in all other latitudes. 


Chap. XV.) PYOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, 145 


mediate times of ascension*, between it and the succeeding 
degree, may be reckoned; shuld it be on the mid-heaven, 
the times of ascension must be reckoned on.a right sphere ; 
and, if it be on the west, descending, the intermediate times 
of descensiont are to be reckoned. But, should the pre- 
ceding degree be between any two of these angles, as, for 
"Instance, at the distance of Aries, just spoken of, the pro- 
per times for each angle must first be considered. And, 
since the first point of Aries was assigned a position between 
the two angles of the mid-heaven and the west, the proper 
times of the distances from these angles to the first point of 
Geminit would be found to be 58 from the mid-heaven, 
and 70 from the west. The distances, in temporal hours, 
of the preceding degree from each of these angles, are then 
to be ascertained; and whatever proportion these same tem- 
poral hours, contained in such distances between the said 
preceding degree and each angle, may bear to the temporal 
hours of the whole quadrant, the same proportion, out of the 
excess of the times of distance of one angle over those of 
the other, is either to be added to, or deducted from, the 
actual number of times of the respective angles. For in- 
stance, in the example before set forth, 70 times exceed:58 
times by 12; and the preceding place was distant from the 
angles three eaual temporal hours, which are the half of six, 
the number belonging to the whole quadrant. Now, three 
being the half of six, and 12 being the amount of the 
excess, the half of 12 is therefore to be taken, giving 6 to 
be either added to the 58 times, or subtracted from the 70: 


a 


= Oblique ascension. 


+ The times of oblique descension of any arc of the zodiac are equal 


to the times of oblique ascension of its opposite arc; as before ex- 
plained. 


t That is to say, at the time of the ist point of Aries transiting the 
cusp of each angle respectively. 


U 


ener es : 7 2 === — <7 ~~" rrr 


146 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [ Book HI. 


thus, in either way, producing 64, the required number of 
times. 

If, however, the preceding place should be distant from 
either angle two temporal hours, which are the third part of 
six, then, in that case, the third part of 12, the amount of 
the excess, must be taken, viz. 4: and, if the said two hours 
be the distance, as calculated from the mid-heaven, .the 
said 4 times are to be added to the 58 times; but, if it be 
the distance from the occidental angle, the 4 times are to. be 
subtracted from the 70. 

In conformity with these rules now laid down, the amount 
of the times must necessarily be obtained*. 

The anzretic and critical influences of all meetings or 





*The calculation of time may be greatly facilitated by the use of a 
zodiacal planisphere, said to have been invented about thirty years 
ago by Mr. Ranger, who died without making his invention public. 
The invention consists of a set of instruments perfectly adapted, as 
far as relates to the zodiac, for astronomical, as well as astrological, 
purposes; and the completeness with which it solves, in the most 
intelligible. and expeditious manner, all the astronomical problems 
of the zodiac, deserves attention. Whether a similar planisphere was 
known in the days of Placidus, I am not aware; but it is worthy of 
remark that the following words occur in his “ Primum Mobile,” and 
seem almost to have been predicated of Mr. Ranger’s planisphere :— 
‘If any one would provide himself with a Ptolemaic planisphere, with 
- “the horary circles, crepuscules, the zodiac’s latitude, and all other 
“ things requisite, it would be of very great service towards foreseeing 
** the aspects.” (Cooper’s Translation, p.87.) Inthe Appendix will 
be found a plate, containing diagrams drawn by the instruments in 
question, which, though not completely filled up, will shew how easily, 
and, at the same time, how accurately, the measure of time in di- 
rections may be ascertained. The said diagrams have been adapted 
to the “exemplification” here given by Ptolemy; one of them being 
Jaid down for the latitude of Alexandria, and the other for the: lati- 
tude of southern Britain (51° 30’ N.), with similar positions of the 
preceding and succeeding places adverted to in the text. 


Chap. XV.] | ‘-ProLEMY’sS TETRABIBLOS. 147 


descensions of prorogators* remain to be determined; be- 
ginning, in due order, with such as are accomplished in the’ 
shortest time. And whatever else may happen, by means 
of any affliction or assistance offered (in the manner hereto- 
fore prescribed) during che actual transit of the meeting, is 
also to be decided on, as well as whatever may occur through 
other circumstances, arising out of the ingresses taking place 
at the time: because, should the places of both the signifi- 
cators be afflicted, and should the transit of the stars, at the 
then existing ingress, operate injuriously on the chief ruling 
places, it is then altogether probable that death will ensuet ; 
and, even though one of the placest may be disposed fa- 
vourably to human nature, the crisis will still be important 
and perilous ; but, if both the places be so disposed favour- 
ably, some debility only, or transient malady, or hurt, will 
then happen. It is, however, necessary in these cases, to 
consider also what familiarity, or analogy, the peculiar pro- 
perties of the places, thus meeting, may bear to the circum- 
stances of the nativity. 

In order to obviate the doubts which frequently arise, as 
to the particular star or place to which the aneretic domi- 
nion ought to be assigned, all the meetings should be duly 
contemplated and considered, each by each ; and thus, after 
considering those chiefly corresponding with the events. 





* 


* These meetings and descensions are technically termed “ direc-- 
“ tions.” | ' 

+ On these words Placidus has the following remark: “ ‘The revo- 
« lutions may possess some virtue, but only according to the consti- 
“tution of the stars to the places of the prorogators of the nativity, 
“and their places of direction, but no farther; as Ptolemy was of 
“ opinion, and briefly expresses himself in his Chapter of Life. 
<<‘ «Those who are afflicted, both in the places and conclusions of the 
“ «years, by the revolution of the stars infecting the principal places, 
“have reason o expect certain death.’” (p. 127, Cooper’s Transl.) 

+ Of the significators beforementioned. 


eas 


148 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IIf. 


already past, and with the future events about to follow, or 


with the whole together, it will be practicable to found an 
observation on the equality or inequality of their influence. 


Chapter XVI. 
The Form and Temperament of the Body. 


THE matters affecting and regulating the duration of life 
have now been disposed of ; and it becomes proper to enter 
into further particulars, commencing, in due order, with the 
figure and conformation of the body; because Nature forms 
and moulds the body before she inspires it with a soul. In 
fact, the body, in its materiality, is endowed with suitable 
constitutional properties begotten with it, and almost appa- 
rent from its very birth; but the soul afterwards, and by 
degrees, developes the appropriate qualities which it derives 
from the primary cause, and which become known much 
later than external attributes, and in process of time only. 

In regard to the body, therefore, it is in all cases requisite 
to observe the oriental horizon, and to ascertain what planets 
may preside or have dominion over it, and alsg to pay par- 
ticular attention tothe Moon. For, from both these places*, 
and from their rulers, as well as from the natural formation 
and contemperament appertaining to every species of the 
human race, and also from the figure ascribed to those fixed 
stars which may be co-ascending, the conformation of the 
body is to be inferred. The planets possessing dominion 
have the chief influence, and the proper qualities of theis 
places co-operate with them. And, in order to simplify 
these instructions, and as the planets are first to be treated 
of, each planet is individually to’ be considered as follows : 
viz. 





* That of the ascendant, and that of the Moon. 


Chap. XVI.]  PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. 149 


Saturn, when oriental, acts on the personal figure by pro- 
ducing a yellowish complexion and a good constitution ; 
with black and curled hair, a broad and stout chest, eyes of 
ordinary quality, and a proportionate size of body, the tem- 
perament of which is compounded principally of moisture 
and cold. Should he be occidental, he makes the personal 
figure black or dark, thin and small, with scanty hair on the 
head; the body without hair, but well shaped; the eyes 
black or dark ; and the bodily temperament consisting chiefly 
of dryness and cold. | 

Jupiter ruling, when oriental, makes the person white or 
fair, with a clear complexion, moderate growth of hair, and 
large eyes, and of good and dignified stature; the tempera- 
ment being chiefly of heat and moisture. "When occidental, 
he stil] causes a fair complexion, but not of equal clearness; 
and he produces long straight hair, with baldness on the 
forehead or on the crown of the head; and he then also 
gives a middle stature to the body, with a temperament ef 
more moisture. 

Mars, ascending, gives a fair ruddiness to the person, 
_with large size, a healthy constitution, blue or grey eyes, a 
sturdy figure, and_a moderate growth of hair, with a tem- 
perament principally of heat and dryness. When occidental, — 
he makes the complexion simply ruddy, and the personal 
figure of maderate stature, with small eyes; the body with- 
out hair, and the hair of the head light or red, and straight ; 
the bodily temperament being chiefly dry. 

Venus operates in a manner similar to that of Jupiter, 
hut, at the same time, more becomingly and more gracefully ; 
producing qualities of a nature more applicable to women 
and female beauty, such as softness, juiciness, and greater 
delicacy. She also peculiarly makes the eyes beautiful, and 
_ venders them of an azure tint. 

Mercury, when oriental, makes the personal figure of a 
ycllowish complexion, and of stature proportionate and well- 


‘ 


150 PTOLEMY’S .TETRABIBLOS. [Book IIT. 


shaped, with small eyes and a moderate growth of hair; and 
the bodily temperament is chiefly hot. If occidental, he 
gives a complexion white or fair, but not altogether clear ; 
straight, dark hair, a thin and slight figure, some squint or 
defect in the eyes, and a long visage* faintly red; the tem- 
perament being chiefly dry. 

The Sun and Moon, when configurated with any one of 
the planets, also co-operate: the Sun adds a greater noble- 
ness to the figure, and increases the healthiness of the con- 
stitution ; and the Moon, especially when holding or delay- 
ing her separation}, generally contributes better proportion 
and greater delicacy of figure, and greater moisture of tem- 
perament ; but, at the same time, her influence in this latter 
particular is adapted to the proper ratio of her illumination ; 
as referred to in the modes of temperament mentioned in 
the beginning of this treatiset. | 

Again, should the planets be matutine, and fully con- 
spicuous§, they will cause the body to be large ; if in their 
first station, they will make it strong and vigorous; if they 
should precede or be in advance, it will be disproportionate ; 
if in their second station, it will be weaker, and, if vesper- 
tine, altogether mean and subservient to evil treatment and 
oppression. At the same time, the places of the planets|j, as 
has been already said, co-operate especially in producing the 
shape of the personal figure, and contribute also towards the 
temperament. 





* The original word is (in the accusative plural) asyexws, which 
Allatius has rendered, by “ pedibus caprinis,” goat-footed, as ifit were 
compounded of aié capra and xevg pes; but the preferable derivation 
seems to be from af and w} vultus; meaning “ goat-faced.” 

+ From any one of the said planets. 

} Vide Chap. 8, Book 1. 

§ The Greek is ro:wpsves paces; literally “making apparition ;” bat 
the subsequent context seems to require the meaning I have adopted. 

|| ‘The parts of the signs in which the planets are posited. . 


- Chap. XVI.] PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. iL 


- And further, it is the general tendency of the quadrant 
comprised between the vernal equinox and the summer tro- 
pic to produce good complexions, advantageous stature, fine 
constitutions, and fine eyes ; with a temperament abounding 
in heat and moisture. The quadrant from the summer tro- 
pic to the autumnal equinox tends to produce an ordinary 
complexion, proportionate stature, a healthy constitution, 
large eyes, a stout person, with curled hair, and a tempera- 
ment abounding in heat and dryness. The quadrant from 
the autumnal equinox to the winter tropic causes yellowish 
complexions, slender, thin, and sickly persons, with a moder- 
ate growth of hair, fine eyes, and a temperament abundantly 
dry and cold.. The other quadrant, from the winter tropic to 
the vernal equinox, gives a dark complexion, proper stature, 
straight hair on the head and not any on the body, a goodly 
figure, and a temperament abounding in cold and moisture. 

To speak, however, more particularly, all constellations of 
human form, both those within and those without the zo- 
diac, act in favour of giving a handsome shape to the body, 
and due proportion to the figure ; while those not of human 
form vary its due proportions, and incline it towards their 
own shape ; assimilating it, in some measure, to their own 
peculiarities, either by enlarging or diminishing its size, by 
giving it additional strength or weakness, or by otherwise 
improving or disfiguring it.. Thus, for example, Leo, Virgo, 
and Sagittarius, enlarge the. person ; and Pisces, Cancer, and 
Capricorn, tend to make it diminutive ; and thus, again, the 
‘upper and anterior parts of Aries, Taurus, and Leo, increase 
its strength, and their-lower and posterior parts render it 
weaker: while, on the other hand, Sagittarius, Scorpio, and 
Gemini, act conversely ; for their anterior parts produce 
greater debility, and their posterior parts greater vigour. In 
like manner, Virgo, Libra, and Sagittarius, contribute to 
render the person handsome and well-proportioned ; and 


oii, 


152 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. { Book IIt. 


Scorpio, Pisces, and Taurus, incline it to be mis-shapen and 
disfigured. 

The other constellations* also operate on similar prinei- 
ples; and all these influences it is necessary to bear in mind, 
in order that the peculiar properties, observed in their joint 
temperament, may be so compounded as to authorise an in- 


ference therefrom, concerning the form and temperament of 
the body. 


Ghapter XVII. 
The Hurts, Injuries, and Diseases of the Body. 


Next in succession to the foregoing chapter, the circum- 
stances relating to bodily hurts, injuries, and diseases, claim 
to be discussed ; and they require to be considered in pa 
following rade. 

For the investigation of these circumstances, the two an- 
gles on the horizon, both the ascendant and the western, 
rfiust m all cases be remarked; but more especially the 
western angle and its preceding hone, which is inconjunct 
with the ascendant. After these angles have been noted, it 
must be observed in what manner the malefic planets may be 
configurated with them: for, if both the malefics, or even 
if one of them, should be stationed bodily on any of the suc- 
cessive degrees composing the said angles, or be configarated 
with such degrees in quartile or in opposition, some bodily 
disorders or injuries will attach to the native or person then 
born : and this will especially happen, if, also, both the lu- 
minaries, either together or in opposition, or even if one of 
them, should be angularly posited in the manner described. 
Because, in such a case, not only a malefic which may have 





* For the operative qualities of the other constellations, vide Chap- 
ters 10 and 11, Book 1. 


t The sixth house. 


Chap. XVII] erotemy’s ravnauiatos, 153 


ascended in succession to the luminaries, but also any one 
which may have pre-ascended, if placed in an angle, has 
power to inflict certain diseases and injuries, such as may be 
indicated by the places of the horizon and of the signs, as 
well as by the natures of the planets themselves ; whether 
malefics, or others evilly afflicted and configurated with 
them. 

Such parts ‘of the signs, as contain the afflicted part of 
the horizon, will shew in what part of the body the misfor- 
tune will exist, whether it be a hurt, or disease, or both: 
and the natures of the planets, in operating the misfortune, 
also regulate its particular form or species, For, among the 
chief parts of the human body, Saturn rules the right ear, 
the spleen, the bladder, the phlegm, and the bones; Jupiter 
governs the hand, the lungs, the arteries, and the seed 3 
Mars, the ieft ear, the kidnies, the veins, and the privities ; 
the Sun rules the eyes, the brain, the heart, the sinews or 
nerves, and all the right side; Venus, the nostrils, the liver, 
and the flesh ; Mercury, the speech, the understanding, the 
bile, the tongue, and the fundament ; and the Moon go~ 
verns the palate, the throat, the stomach, the bells sag 
womb, and all the left parts. . 

It generally happens that some casual hurt, or injurious 
affection of the body, is the utmost that takes effect when 
the malefics may be oriental, and. that considerable diseases 
occur. only when the malefics may be occidental. And a 
hurt is distinct from a disease, inasmuch as the pain, which 
it induces at the time, is not afterwards continued 3 while a 
disease is, on the other hand, imposed. on the sufferer either 
constantly or at repeated intervals, These remarks are ap- 
plicable to all cases; but, in order to inquire particularly 
into the nature of the hurt or disease, a further attention 
must be paid to the figures, or schemes, with which the 
effects, about’to be produced, _ for the most part corre- 


pone in character. 
x 


1 ote 


1 ac 
ie ee . « 
Patt oe 7 “eee ' Ls 


. — ae eee Se OE 


154 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. - [Book III. 


For instance, blindness of one eye will ensue, when the 
Moon may he ‘in the before-mentioned. angles, either: oper- 
ating her conjunction, or being at the full: it will also hap- 
pen should she be configurated with the Sun in any other 
proportional aspect, and be. at the same time connected with 
any one of the nebulous collections in the zodiac ; such as 
the cloudy spot of Cancer, the Pleiades of Taurus, - the 
arrow-head of Sagittarius, the sting of Scorpio, the parts 
about the mane of Leo, or the urn of Aquarius. Moreover, 
both eyes will be injured should the Moon be in amr angle, 
and in her decrease, and Mars or Saturn, being matutine, 
ascend in succession to her; or, again, if the Sun be in an 
angle, and these planets pre-ascend before him, and be con- 
figurated with both the luminaries, whether the luminaries 
be in one and the same sign, or in opposition ; . provided also 
the said planets, although oriental of the Sun, be. occidental 


of the Moon.—Under these circumstances, therefore, Mars 


will cause blindness by a stroke or blow, or by the sword 
or by burning ; and, if he be configurated with Mercury, it 
will be effected either-in a place of exercise or sport, :or by 
the assault of robbers. Saturn, however, under the same 
circumstances, produces blindness by cataract, or cold, by a 
white film, or by.other similar disorders. _. 

: Venus, if in one of the angles before-mentioned, and 
especially if she’ be in that: of the west, and-Saturn be in 
conjunction or in configuration with her, or -be changing 
place with her*, while Mars, at the same time, is in elevation 
above her, or in opposition to her, will produce impotence 
in the native, if a male; and, if a female, will render her. 
liable to abortion, or to produce children still-born, or not 
capable of being extracted except in mangled parts.. Such 





' ® This seems to imply, if Satarn be in one of: Venus's places of dig- 


nity, and Venus in one of Satarn’s. Such.a counterposition is fech- 
-nically termed “ mutual reception.” 35 


é 


Chap. XVII.] proLEmy’s TETRABIBLOS. 155 


misfortunes especially happen ‘under Cancer, Virgo, and 
Capricorn ; even though the Moon may bein the ascendant, 
in conjunction with Mars. And if, under.the same circum- 
stances, Venus be.also configurated with Mercury, as well 
as Saturn, Mars again being in elevation above her, or in op- 
position to her, the native. will, be either an eunuch or her- 
maphrodite, or devoid of the natural channels and vents. 
And, when these positions occur, should the Sun also par- 
take in the configuration, the Juminaries and Venus being all 
masculinely constituted, the Moon in her decrease, and the 
malefics brought up in the degrees next successively ascend- 
ing, the. males will be born maimed or crippled, or in- 
jured in their private members; (particularly under Aries, 
Leo, Scorpio, Capricorn, and Aquarius ;) and the females 
will remain childless and unprolific. And it also occasion- 
ally happens that the natives, under such a configuration, are 
likewise injured in the face or eyes. 

If Saturn and Mercury, in conjunction with the Sun, be 
in the before-mentioned angles, the native will have some 
defect in the tongue, and stammer or speak with difficulty : 
especially if Mercury be occidental, and both he and Saturn 
configurated with the Moon. Should Mars, however, be 
found together with them, he will for the most part remove 
the defect in the tongue, after the Moon shall have complet- 
ed her approach to him. 

' Further, should the malefics be in angles, and the lumi- 
naries, either together or in opposition, be brought up to 

‘them ; or, “if the malefics be brought up to the luminaries, 
especially when. the Moon may be in her nodes, or in her 
bend*, or in obnoxious signs, such as Aries, Taurus, Can- 
cer, Scorpio, and Capricorn, the body will then be afflicted © 
with excrescences, distortions, lameness, or paralysis. . 





* In her extreme latitude, whether north or south. 


156 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. {Book Ill. 


If the malefics be in conjunction with the luminaries, the 
calamity will take effect from the very moment of birth: but - 
should they be in the mid-heaven, in elevation above the 
luminaries, or in opposition to each other, it will then arise 
out of some great and dangerous accident; such as a fall 
from some height or precipice, an attack of robbers, or of | 
quadrupeds. And thus, if Mars hold dominion, he. will 
produce the misfortune by means of fire or wounds, through 
quarrels, or by robbers; and if Saturn, it will be caused by 
a fall, by shipwreck, or by convulsive fits or spasms. 

The minor bodily disorders mostly occur en the Moan’s 
being posited in a tropical or equinoctial sign 5 and, if in 
that of the vernal equinox, these disorders usually arise from 
the white leprosy ; in that of the. summer tropic, fram tet- 
_terss in that of the autumnal equinox, from leprosy ; and in 
. that of the winter tropic, from the eruption of pimples, 
and similar inconveniences. 

Considerable diseases, however, take effect when the ma- 
lefies may be configurated in the same situations as those 
before prescribed, yet differing in one respect; that is to 
say, being occidental of the Sun and oriental of the Moon. 
In such cases, Saturn will generally produce cold in the 
bowels, excessive phlegm, rheumatism, emaciation, sickli- 
nese, jaundice, dysentery, cough, obstruction, cholic, or 
scurvy ; and, in women, besides these diseases, he produces 
complaints of the womb. Mars will cause expectoration of 
blood, atrabilarious attacks, pulmonary complaints, sores, 
and diseases in the private parts, (which will be rendered still 
more painful by surgical burning or incision,) such as fis- 
tula, hemorrhoids, ot knots in the fundament, and also 
inflamed and putrifying ulcers. In women, to these cala- 
mities he adds abortion, ‘excision of the foetus or its marti- 
fication, 

And, even though these planets should not be properly 
configurated towards the particular parts of the body, their 


Chap. XVII.) FTOLMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 157 


qualities will still operate. . Mercury also will act with them, 
- and contribute to the increase of the evil: thus, if he be in 
familiarity with Saturn, he will much augment the coldness, 
and promote the continuance of rheumatism, and the disturb- 
ance of the fluids; especially in the chest, throat, and - 
stomach. If in familiarity with Mars, he will tend to pro- 
duce greater dryness, and will increase ulcers, abscesses, loss 
of hair, scarified sores, erysipelas, tetters, blackness of bile, 
insanity, epilepsy*, and similar disorders. 

Some of the properties, peculiar to disease, arise out of 
the varions character of the signs which may contain the 
above-mentioned configurations in the two angles. Thus 
Cancer, Capricom, and Pisces, and, in short, all signs as- 
cribed to terrestrial animals and fishes, appropriately cause 
diseases of putridity, tetters, excoriation, scrophula, fistula, 
leprosy, and the like; while Sagittarius and Gemini produce 
disease by falling fits and epilepsy. And if the planets hap- 
pen to be posited in the latter. degrees of the signs containing 
them, the extremities of the body will then be chiefly affect- 
ed by the disease or hurt; which will arise from humours 
or accidents, producing leprosy, gout, or other areas 
in the hands and feet. 

Under the circumstances above detailed, the disease or 
hurt will be incurable, provided there shall be not one of the 
benefics in configuration with the malefics which effect the 
evil, nor with the luminaries posited in angles; and even 
, though the benefics may be so configuratecd, the misfortune 
will still be incapable of remedy, if the malefics be well for- 
tified, and in elevation above them. 





* Tne spec vorou; literally, “ the holy disease,” which authors have 
explained to mean epilepsy. Perhaps the disease was antiently call- 
ed holy, because the patient, when possessed by the fit, scemed te be 
under the influence of some supernatural agency. 


Sa 7 omen ._—— er 
. oo - * 


- 158 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, . [Book II. 


Should the benefics, however, hold principal ‘situations, 
and be in elevation above the obnoxious malefics, the disease 
or hurt will then be moderate, and have neither deformity- 
nor disgrace attached to it; "and it will sometimes be alto- 
gether prevented and set aside, if the benefics be oriental. 
Jupiter, for instance, by means of human aid, such as wealth 
or rank can command, will conceal and soothe hurts and 
diseases ; and, if Mercury be joined with him,,the assistance 
will be further improved by the addition of skilful -physicians 
and good medicine. Venus, likewise, through the media- 
tion of deities and oracles, will cause hurts to appear in a 
manner neither ungraceful nor unbecoming, and will ame- 
liorate diseases by medicines granted by the gods. : 

Lastly, should Saturn be present in the configuration, the 
afflicted persons will move abroad to shew their maladies, and 
to complain ; and if Mercury also be present, they will do 
so for the sake of deriving sa a and profit from the ex- 
hibition. 


Chapter XVIII. 
The Quality of the Mind. 


Tux consideration of circumstances applicable to the body 
is practised under the foregoing rules. 

‘Of the spiritual qualities, however, all those which are 
rational and intellectual are contemplated by the situation of 
Mercury; while all others, which regard the mere sensitive 
faculties, and are independent of reason, are considered rather 
by other luminaries of a less subtle constitution and more 
ponderous body ; for instance, by the Moon and such stars 
as she may be configurated with, as well by separation®, 


as by application. | 
had 





* That is to say, in the-commencement of her separation non the 
aspect or a of such stars, 


= 


Chap. XVIII.] PToLEMy’s TETRABIBLOS. 159 


Now the mind is liable to impulse in a multiplicity of di- 
rections, and the investigation of them cannot, be. summarily 
nor hastily performed, but must be conducted by means of 
many various observations : for the different qualities of the 
signs, containing Mercury and the Moon, or such stars as 
hold any influence over those two, are well competent to 
contribute towards the properties of the mind; so likewisé 
are the configurations made with the Sun and the angles, by 
stars bearing any relation to the point in question ; besides, 
also, the peculiar nature exercised by each star in: operating 
upon the mental movements. 

Thus, the tropical signs generally disposes the mind to 


~ enter much into political matters, rendering it eager to 


engage in public and turbulent affairs, fond of distinction, 
and busy jn theology; at the same. time, ingenious, acute, 
inquisitive, inventive, speculative, and studious of astrology 
and divination. 

Bicorporeal signs render the mind variable, versatile, not 
easy to be understood, volatile, and unsteady 5 ; inclined to 
duplicity, amorous, wily, fond of music, careless, full of 
expedients, and regretful*. , 

Fixed signs make the mind just, uncompromising, con- 
stant, firm of purpose, prudent, patient, industrious, strict, 
ehaste, mindful of injuries, steady in pursuing its object, | 
contentious, desirous of honour, seditious, avaricious, and 
pertinacious, 

Oriental. positions, and ihiel in the ascendant, especially 
if made by planets in their proper faces}, make men liberal, 
frank, self-qonfident, brave, ingenious, unreserved, yet acute. 
Oriental stations, and positions on the mid-heaven, or cul- 





* The Greek is xerayedatixov;, Which means “ penitent” or “prone 

“ to repentance,” or “ to subsequent regret.” It isdifficult to « monty 

i{s precise meaning in the text. ~ 
-.¢ Vide Chapter 26, Book 1. 


160 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [ Book 4 I. 


minations, make men reflective, constant, of good memory, 
firm, prudent, magnanimous, successful in pursuing their 
- desires, inflexible, powerful in intellect, strict, not easily” 
imposed upon, judicious, active, hostile to crime, and skil- 
ful in science. 

Precedent and occidental positions make men unsteady, 
irreverent, imbecile, impatient of labour, easily impressed, 
humble, doubting, wavering, boastful, and cowardly, sloth- 
ful, lazy, and hard to rouse. Occidental stations, and posi- 
tions on the lower heaven, (as well as Mercury and Venus, 
when making vespertine descension by day, and rising in 
the night,) will render the mind ingenious and sagacious, 
but not capable of great recollection, nor very industrious ; 
yet inquisitive into occult matters, such as magic and sacred 
mysteries ; also studious of mechanics, and mechanical 
instruments; addicted to the observation of meteors, to phi- 
losophy, to augury by means of birds, and to the judgement 
of dreams. 

Further, should the planets having dominion be in places 
of their own, and in conditions suitable to their own quali- . 
ties, the mental properties will be rendered exquisite, unim- 
peded, and successful : and especially if these planets rule at 
the same time over both places; that is to say, be by some 
mode configurated with Mercury, and hold separation from, or 
application to the Moon. Should the said planets, however, 
not be thus constituted, but be posited in places not parti- 
_cularly appropriate to themselves, they will yet, even then, 
infuse into the composition of the mental energythe pro- 
perty of their own nature ; but obscurely and imperfectly, 
and not with such force and strong evidence as if the other 
case. 

The peculiar qualities of planets in dominion, or in.ele- 
vation, are powerfully impressed upon the mental energy : 
for instance, persons, who, in consequesice of the familiarity 
of the malefics, become wicked and ieee have their im- 


Cap. XVIII.] pro.emy’s TETAABIBLOS. | 161 


pulse to commit evil, free and unrestrained, when the said 

familiarity is not governed by any coiitraty influence. But, 
should a contrary cofdition impede and govern that familia- 
rity, the impulse will be frustrated, and the culprits will be 
easily overtaken, and undergo punishttent. In like manner, 
persons endowed with goodness and vittue, by the faniilia- 
rity between the bendfics and the before-mentioned placés*, 

and when no contrary influence in elevation may interpose, 
will exert themselves with cheerfulness and aldcrity in pet-- 
forming good actions, will be subject to no injustice, but 
enjoy the advantages of their honesty and virtue. If, how- 
ever, this familiarity should be supetseded by some contrary 

. condition, the very mildness and humanity of these persons 
will operate to their disadvantage, exposing them to contempt ~ 
and accusation, and rendering them liable to be wronged by 
the multitude. 

_ The fofegoing observations, relative to the moral habit, 
apply génerally ; and the particular properties, created in the 
mental énergiés by ge actual nature of the planets, accord- 
ing to the respective dominion of cath, retain to be treated 
of, 


The planet Saturn, therefore, when alone possessing do- 
minion of the mind, and governing Mercury and the Moon, 
and if posited in glory, both cosmically atid with respect td 
the angles}, will make men careful of theit bodies}, strong 
and profound in opinion, austere, singular in their modes of 
thinking, laborious, imperious, hostile to crime, avaricious, 
parsimonious, accumalatots of wealth, violent, and envious : 
but, if tie be not in glory, cosmically, and as regards the 
angles, he i —— the mut making it peels eas ; 





* That of Metcury, and that of the Moon. 

t This gems to imply, if well placed in elevation; as, in the Ihiid- 
heaven, for instance, or in a conspicuous situation; and in possession 
of dignities. 

{.Or, persons :—the Oreck it gixerwpadlde, ' 

a ae ° 


ee ee - 


162 PTOLEMY’S TRTRABIBLOS. _ [Book IIT. 
lanimous, ill-disposed, indiscriminating, malignant, timo- 
rous, slanderous, fond of solitude, repining, incapable of 
shame, bigotted, fond of labour, void of natural affection, . 
treacherous in friendship and in family connections, incapa- 
ble of enjoyment, and regardless of the. body*. — Con- 
nected- with - Jupiter inthe mode before-mentioned, being 
also situated in glory, Saturn will render the mind virtuous, 
respectful, well-intentioned, ready to assist, judicious, frugal, 
magnanimous, obliging, solicitous..of good, affectionate in 
all domestic ties, mild, prudent, patient, and philosophical : 
but, if thus connected and posited ingloriously, he makes 
men outrageous, incapable. of learning, timorous, highly su- 
perstitious, yet regardless of religion, suspicious, averse to 
children, incapable of friendship, cunning, misjudging, 
faithless, foolishly wicked, irascible, hypocritical, idle and 
useless, without ambition, yet regretful, morose, highly re- 
served, over-cautious, and dull.—Conciliated with Mars, and 
_ posited in glory, Saturn renders men reckless, over-diligent, 
frée in speech, turbulent, boastful, austgre in their dealings, 
pitiless, contemptuous, fierce, warlike, bold, fond of tumults, 
insidious, deceitful, and implacable ; promoters of faction, 
tyrannical, rapacious, hostile to the commonwealth, delight- 
ing in strife, vindictive, profound in guilt, strenuous, impa- 
tient, insolent, mischievous, overbearing, evil, unjust, ob- 
stinate, ‘mhuman, inflexible, immutable in: opinion, busy, 
able in office, active, submitting to no opposition, and on 
the whole. successful in their undertakings ; but, if thus con- 
nected, and not placed in glory, ‘he will make men plun- 
derers, robbers, adulterers, submissive to evil, seeking gain 
by their turpitude, infidels in religion, void of the common 
affections, mischievous, treacherous, thievish, perjurers, and 
sanguinary; eaters of unlawful food, familiar with guilt, 
assassins, sorcerers, sacrilegious, impious, violators of the 
a Pr ee 


* Or, person :—icecmpalus. 


Chap. XVIII.] ProLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. 163 


tomb, and, in short, thoroughly depraved.—Conciliated with 
Venus, and being again in glory, Saturn makes men averse 
to women, and renders them fond of governing, prone to — 
‘solitude, highly reserved, regardless of rank, indifferent to 
beauty, envious, austere, unsociable, singular in opinion, 
addicted to divination and to religious services and myste- 
ries ; solicitous of the priesthood, fanatical, and subservient 
to religion; solemn, reverential, sedate, studious of wisdom, 
faithful in friendship, continent, reflective, circumspect, -and 
scrupulous in regard to female virtue: but, if he be thus 
conciliated, ‘and not posited in glory, he makes men 
licentious’ and libidinous, practisers of lewdness,. careless, 
and impure in sexual intercourse ; obscene, treacherous to 
women, especially to those of their own families; wanton, 
quarrelsome, sordid, hating elegance; slanderous, drunken, 
superstitious, adulterous, and impious ; blasphemers of the 
‘gods, and scoffers at holy rites ; calumniators, - sorcerers, 
hesitating at nothing.—If conciliated with.Mercury, and if 
in a glorious position, Saturn makes’ men inquisitive, loqua- _ 
cious, studious of law and of medicine, mystical, confeder- 
ate in secresy, fabricators of miracles, impostors, improvi- 
dent, cunning, familiar with business, quick in perception, 
petulant, accurate, vigilant, meditative, fond of employment, 
and tractable: but, if connected with Mercury, and not 
posited gloriously, he causés men to be frivolous, vindictive, 
laborious, alienated from their families, fond of tormenting, 
and void of enjoyment ; - night-wanderers, insidious, trea- 
cherous, pitiless, and thievish ; magicians, sorcerers, forgers 
of writings, cheats, unsuccessful in their undertakings, and 
quickly reduced to adversity.—-Such are the effects of 
Saturn. .. ; | 

When Jupiter alone has dominion of the mind, and is 
gloriously situated, he renders it generous, gracious, pious, 
reverent, joyous, courteous, lofty, Jiberal, just, magnani- 
mous, noble, self-acting, compassionate, fond:of learning, 


—_ = — ee eee ee 


164 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. . [Book FIT. | 


beneficent, benevolent, and calculated for government : and, 
if posited ingloriously, he will endow the mind with qualities 
apparently similar to these, but not of such virtue and lustre : 
aa, instead of generosity, he will then cause profusion ; in- 
stead of piety, bigotry.; for modesty, timidity ; for-noble- 
ness, arrogance; for courteousness, folly ; for elegance, - 
voluptuousness; for magnanimity, carelessness; and for 
liberality, indifference.—Conciliated with Mars, and being 
in glory, Jupiter will make men rough, warlike, skilful in 
military affairs, dictatorial, refractory, impetuous, daring, 


free in speech, able in action, fond of disputation, conten- .- 


tious, imperious, generous, ambitious, irascible, judicious, 
and fortunate: but, if thus connected, and not placed in 
glory, he makes men mischievous, reckless, cruel, pitiless, 
seditious, quarrelsome, perverse, calumnious, arrogant, ava-- 
ricious, rapacious, inconstant, vain and empty, unsteady, 
precipitate, faithleas, injudicious, inconsiderate, senseless, 
and officiqua; inculpators, prodigals, triflers, altogether 
without conduct, and giving way to every impulse.— When 
_ coneiliated with Venys, and in a glorious position, Jupiter 
wil} render the mind pure, joyous, delighting in elegance, in 
the arts and sniences, and in poetry and music; valuable in 
friendship, sincere, beneficent, compassionate, inoffensive,” 
religious, fond of sports and exercises, prudent, amiable and 
affectionate, gracious, noble, brilliant, candid, liberal, dis- 
cregt, temperate, modest, pious, just, fond of glory, and in 
all respests honourable and warthy; but, if posited imglo- 
rigusly, when so connected, he makes men luxurious, soft, 
effeminate, fond of davaing, indulgent in expences, incapable 
of managing women, yet amorous and lascivious ; mean, 
slanderous, adulterous, fond of dress, dissolute, dull, wastes . 
ful, without energy, evervated, fond of personal adornment, 
womanish in mind, yet observant of holy rites and ceremo~ 
nies, faithful, harmless, pleasant, affable, cheerful, and liberal 
to misfortune.—-Lf connected with Mercury, and posited in. 


Chap. XVIII.] _ ProLumy’s TETRABIBLOS. 165 


glory, Jupiter will render men fit for much business, fond of 
learning, and of geometry and the mathematics; poetical, 
public arators, acute, temperate, well-disposed, skilful in 
counsel, politick, beneficent, able in government, pious, re~ 
ligious, valuable in all useful professions, benevolent,. affec- 
tionate in their families, ready in acquiring knowledge, phi- 
losophical, and dignified : but when so connected, and placed 
ingloriously, he will produce contrary effects, rendering men 
- frivolous, empty, contemptible, credulous of falsehood, sense- 
tess, fanatical, trifling, petulant, affecters of wisdom,.stupid, 
arrogant, pretenders in art, magicians, and vacillating :—yet 
he will also produce men skilled in various learning, and of 
strong memory, capable of imparting instruction, and pure 
im their enjoyments. 

Mars alone having dominion of the mind, and placed with 
glory, makes men noble, imperious, iyascible, warlike, versa- - 
tile, pawerful in intellect, daring, bold, refractory, careless, 
obstinate, acute, self-confident, contemptuous, tyrannical, 
strenuous, stern and able in government; but, posited inglo- 
riously, be makes men cruel, mischievous, sanguinary, tu- 
multuous, extravagant in expence, boisterous, ruffian-like, 

. precipitate, drunken, rapacious, pitiless, familiar with crime, _ 
restless, outrageous, hostile to their families, and infidels in 
relizion.—--Should he be conciliated with Venus, and posited 
in glory, be renders the mind cheerful, docile, friendly, com- 
placent, joyous, playful, frank, delighting in songs and danc- 
ing, amorous, fond of the arts, and of dramatic personation, 
voluptuous, brave, libidinous in desire, sensible, cautious, 
and discreet ; disposed to free sexual interaourse *, quick in 
anger, extravagant in expence, and jealous: but, if he have 
an inglorious position when thus conciliated, he makes men 
overbearing, lasciviqus, sordid, opprobrious, adulterous, mis- 





> Theos pases Indore nal cegerwe Uanemevous, v4 





166 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, [Book IIT. 


chievous, liars, fabricators of deceit, cheats of their own fa- 
milies as well as others, ‘eager-in desire; and at the sametime 
soon satiated, debauchers of wives and virgins, daring, impe- 
tuous, ungovernable, treacherous, faithless, dangerous, fickle 
and weak in mind 3 and occasionally also wasteful, fond of : 

dress, audacious, and shameless.—Connected with Mercury, _ 
and placed with glory, Mars renders men skilful in command, 

cautious, strenuous, active, obstinate, yet versatile, i inventive, 
sophistical, laborious, busy in all things, eloquent, imposing, 
deceitful, inconstant, overknowing, maliciously artful, quick 
witted, seductive, hypocritical, treacherous, habituated to 
evil, inquisitive, fond of strife, and successful ; fair dealers 
with persons of habits similar to their own, and,-in short, 
altogether mischievous to their enemies, though beneficial to 
their friends: but, if Mars be posited ingloriously, and thus 
connected, he makes men prodigal, yet avaricious, cruel, 

daring, bold, regretful and vacillating; liars, thieves, infidels 
in religion, perjurers, and impostors ;’ seditious, incendiaries, 
frequenters of theatres, covered with infamy, robbers, house- 
breakers, sanguinary, forgers of writings, familiar with crime, 
jugglers, magicians, sorcerers, and assassins. 

_ When Venus rules alone in a position of glory, she ren- 
. ders the mind benignant, good, voluptuous, copious in wit, 
pure, gay, fond of dancing, jealous, abhorring wickedness, 
delighting in the arts, pious, modest, well-disposed, happy . 
in dreams, affectionate, beneficent, compassionate, refined in 
taste, edsily reconciled, tractable, and. entirely amiable: -but, — 
if contrarily posited, she renders the mind dull, amorous, effe- 
minate, timorous; indiscriminating, sordid, faulty, obscure, 
and ignominious.—Conciliated with Mercury, and: posited 
_ with glory, Venus makes men lovers of the arts, philosophi- 
cal, of scientific mind and good genius, poetical, delighting 
in learning and elegance, polite, voluptuous, luxurious in their 
habits of life, joyous, friendly, pious, prudent, fitted for va- 
_ rious arts, intelligent, not misled by error, quick in learning, 





25k aac edealnal: "ei 


Chap. XVIII.] PproLEmy’s TETRABIBLOS. 167 


self-teaching, emulous of worth, followers of: virtue, copious 
"and agreeable in speech, serene and sincere in manner, de- 
lighting in exercise, honest, judicious, high-minded, and. . 
continent in desire:as regards women *; but, when so con-. 

ciliated and posited adversely, she will make men-oppressive, . 
fit for various arts, evil-tongued, unsteady, malevolent, frau- 

dulent, turbulent, liars, calumniators, faithless, crafty, insi-. 

dious, practised in evil, uncourteous, debauchers of women, 

corrupters of youth +, fond of personal adornment, dissolute, 

infamous, notoriously offensive and publicly complained of, 

yet striving after all things. 

Mercury, alone, having dominion of the mind, and being 
in a glorious position, renders it prudent, clever, sensible, ca- 
pable of great learning, inventive, expert, logical, studious of 
nature, speculative, of good genius, emulous, benevolent, 
skilful in argument, accurate in conjecture, adapted to sci- 
ences and mysteries, and tractable: but, when placed con- 
trarily, he-makes men busy in all things, precipitate, forget- 
ful, impetuous, frivolous, variable, regretful, foolish, incon- 
siderate, void of truth, careless, inconstant, insatiable, ava-. 
ricious, unjust; and altogether of slippery intellect, and pre- 
disposed to error. 

To these influences and their effects, as above detailed, the 
Moon also contributes: for, should .she be in the bends of 
her southern or northern boundary }, she will render the pro- 
perties of the mind more various,. more. versatile in art, and 
more susceptible of change: if she be in. her nodes, she will 
make them more acute, more practical, and more active. 
Also, when in the ascendant, and during the increase of her 
illumination, she augments their ingenuity, perspicuity, firm- 
ness and expansion; but, when found in her decrease, or in 





© Tyee paras s Ob xexcwmystvous Rai (rnerom auss 2. 


T Madey tapbopsag. 
{ That is to say, in her extreme latitude, whether south’ er north. - 


168 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book Il. 


‘occultation, she renders them more heavy, more obtuse, niore 
variablé of purpose, more timid, and more obscure. 

The Sun likewise co-operates, when conciliated with the 
lord of the mental temperament; contributing, if he be ina 
_ glorious position, to increase probity, industry, honour, and 
all laudable qualities ; but, if adversely situated, he increases 
debasement, depravity, obscurity, cruelty, obstinacy, morose- 
ness, and all other oH eg 


Chapter XIX. 
The Diseases of the. Mind. 


"Iw connéction with the foregoing discussion oft the proper- 
ties of the mind, the circumstances relating to eminent men- 
tal disorders, sach as madness, epilepsy *, and others of the 
like formidable nature, duly claim attention. 

Now, with reference to these, it is always éssential to con-' 
sider the planet Mercury and the Moon, and to observe in 
what mode they may be disposed towards each other, and 
towards the angles, and also towards the malefics: for, if the 
Moon and Mercury be unconnected with each other, or with 
the oriental horizon, and provided such planets as may be 
adversely ard noxiously configurated should be im elevation 
above them, or over-rule them, or be in opposition to them, 
the mental properties will then consequently become im- 
pregnated with varfous disorders; the chatacters of which 
may be clearly known by the qualities of. the stars thus -cort- 
trouling the places +. 

It is true that there are many disorders of a thoderate na- 
ture, capable of being distinguished by what has been already. 





* Epilepsy is defined to be “a convulsive motion of ier whole body, 
“ or some of its parts, accompanied with a loss of sense.” The know- 
ledge of this lafter effect probably induced the aufhor fo tank it among 
diseases of the mind. 

+ Of Mercury, the Moon, and the ascendant. 


Chap. XIX.] —- PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. 169 


stated, in the preceeding chapter, regarding the mental quali- — 
ties: for it is by the increase and growth-of certain of those 
qualities, that an injurious excess is produced; and every ir- 
regularity of the moral habit, whether by deficiency or su- 
perabundance, may be fitly termed a moral disorder. But, 
at the same time, there are other disorders of so vast and ma- 
- nifold a disproportion, that they quite, as it were, overpower 
-the natural course of the intellect and passions of the mind. 
And of these greater disorders it is now proposed to treat. 
For example, epilepsy generally attaches to all persons 
born when Mercury and the Moon may be unconnected either - 
with each other, or with the oriental horizon, while Saturn 
and Mars may be in angles and supefintend the scheme; 
that is to say, provided Saturn be so posited by day, and Mars 
by night : otherwise, when the converse may happen in these 
schemes, viz. when Saturn may have dominion by night, but 
Mars by day, (especially if in Cancer, Virgo or Pisces,) the 
persons born will become insane. And they will become 
dsemoniac, and afflicted with moisture of the ‘brain, if the 
Moon, being in face to the Sun, should be governed by the 
malefics; that is ta say, if she:be governed by Saturn when - 
operating her conjunction, but by Mars when effecting her 
opposition; and particularly when it may happen in Sagitta- 
rius and in Pisces. 
If the malefics, only, should have ruled the scheme, in the 
~ manner described, the said disorders of the mind will become 
irremediable, although at the same time not édfinent, but 
doubtful, and not openly displayed ; but, should the benefics, 
Jupiter and Venus, be conciliated, and be posited in eastern 
parts. and in angles, while the malefics may be in western 
pasts, the disorders, although highly conspicuous, will then 
be -suaceptible of cure. For instance, under Jupiter’s in- 
fluence, they will be healed by means-of medical or surgical 
au, and by diet and medicine; under Venus, of the guidance 


of oracles. and by divine interposition. 
Zz 


170 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IIT. 


Should the benefics, however, be occidental, and the male- — 


fits be found in eastern parts and in angles, the disorders will 
then become not only incurable, but most conspicuous: the 
epileptic persons will then be subjected to constant fits, and 
to danger of death; the insane will become outrageous and 
unmanageable, breaking away from their families, raving and 
wandering in nakedness: the demoniacs and those afflicted 
with moisture of the brain will become furious, uttering mys- 
terious sayings, and wounding themselves. 
' The several places of position in the scheme also afford 
co-operation: for instance, those of the Sun and Mars con- 
tribute to insanity; those of Jupiter and Mercury, to epilepsy ; 
those of Venus, to the fury of enthusiasms; and those of 
Saturn and the Moon, to demoniac affections and moisture 
of the brain. ? 
It‘is by such configurations, as those just described, that 
_ any morbid deviation, occurring in the active or reasoning 
faculties of the mind, is produced; but a deviation of: the 
passive, or merely sensitive faculties, is discernible chiefly 
in the excess and deficiency (as the case may be) of the mas- 
_ culine and feminine genders ; that is to say, in the-supera- 
bundance, or deficiency, of the power of either gender, to 
produce a conformation agreeable to its own proper nature: 
and a knowledge of this latter deviation is to be acquired by 
means of the following rules. 

When the Sun, instead of Mercury, may be with the 
Moon, and if Mars, together with Venus, be then in fami- 
Jiarity with them, in that case, provided the luminaries only 
be found in masculine signs, men will excel in their nature, 
or, in other words, will possess in full plenitude the proper- 
ties becoming their sex; while the properties of women, 
who are thas constituted more masculinely and more actively, 
will deviate from the usual limits of nature. But, if both 
Mars and Venus, or if only one of them, be likewise mas- 
culinely situated; men will be, freely and promptly inclined 


4 


Chap. X1X.]  PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 171 


‘to natural intercourse and connexion 3 and women will he, in 
like manner, licentious and intemperate in intercourse beyond 
nature. Their desires will be practised in privacy, and not 
openly, should only Venus be situated masculinely; but 
shamelessly and publicly, if Mars also be masculinely placed, 
together with Venus. 

But, if the luminaries only be in feminine signs, women 
will then possess their natural functions in greater plenitude, 
and men will deviate from the limits of nature towards effe- 
minacy and wantonness. And, if Venus be femininely ‘po- 
sited, women will be lustful and licentious, and men wanton 
and soft; seeking connexion contrary to nature; yet in pri- . 
vacy and not openly: but, if Mars be posited femininely, 
they will then put their desires in practice shamelessly:a! and 
publicly. 

The oriental and diurnal positions of Mars and Venus 
also contribute to more masculine and more reputable quali- 
ties; and their occidental and vespertine * positions to qua- 
lities more feminine, and more sordid. 

Lastly, if Saturn be in familiarity with them, he ‘Ail like- 
wise co-operate, by tending to produce greater impurity and 
obscenity, and greater evil altogether; but Jupiter, if in fa- 
miliarity, tends to greater decency and modesty, and altoge- 
ther to better conduct ; and Mercury to greater mobility, di- 
versity, activity, and notoriety of the passions. 





* Benepe; perhaps, more properly, nocturnal: the word being used 
in contrast to opepive:, diurnal, 


END OF THE THIRD BOOK. 


BOOK THE FOURTH. 
Chapter I. 


Proem. 

ALL those circumstances have now been set forth, which 
occur previously to the birth, as well as at the actual birth, 
and after it, and which it seemed necessary to mention, as 
conducing to a knowledge of the general quality of the con- 
temperament produced. And of the other points, now res 
maining, by which extrinsic events * are contemplated, those 
regarding the several fortunes of wealth and of rank claim 
to be taken first into consideration. Each of these fortunes 
has a distinct relationship ; for instance, that of wealth re- 
_lates to the body, and that of rank to the mind. 


Chapeer II. 
The Fortune of Wealth. 


THE circumstances regulating the fortune of wealth are to be 
judged of from that part alone, which is expressly denomi- 
nated the Part of Fortune; the position of which is, in all 
cases, whether arising in the day of in the night, always as 
far removed from the ascendant as the Sun is distant from 
the Moon ft. | 
When the Part of Fortune has been determined, it must be 
ascertained to what planets the dominion of it belongs; and 
ese Se ts ale eS a ete ee ee 
* That is to say, such events as are independent of the will, and not 
necessarily consequent on any peculiar conformation of the minéor . 
body. 
+ Vide Chapter 13 of the 8d Book. 


. Chap. f.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 173 


their power and connexion, as also the power and ‘connexion 
of others configurated with them, or in elevation above them, 
whether of the same or of an adverse condition, are then 
to be observed: for, if the planets which assume dominion 
of the Part of Fortune be in full force, they will create much | 
wealth, and especially should the luminaries also give them 
suitable testimony in addition. 

In this manner, Satuim will effect the acquirement of 
wealth by means of buildings, agriculture, or navigation 5, 
Jupiter, by holding some government, or office of trust, or by 
the priesthood ; Mars, by the army and military command ; 
Venus by means of friends, by the dowry of wives, or by 
other gifts proceeding from women *; and Mercury by the 
sciences and by trade. : 

Should Saturn, however, when thus in influence over the 
fortune of wealth, be also configurated with Jupiter, he par- 
ticularly provides wealth through inheritance; especially, if 
the configuration should exist in the superior angles, Jupiter 
being also in a bicorporeal sign and yeceiving the application 
of the Moon; for, in-such a case, the native will also be 
adopted by persons unallied to him, and will become heir to 
' their property. 

And, further, if other stars, of the same condition as those 
which rule the Part of Fortune, shculd likewise exhibit tes- 
timonies of dominion, thé wealth will be permanent: but, 
on the other hand, if stars of an adverse condition should 
either be in elevation above the ruling places, of ascend itt 
succession to them, the wealth will not continue.—The ge- 
neral period of its duration is, however, to be calculated by 
means of the declination of the stara,y which operate the loss, 
in fespect of the angles and succedent houses t. 





* I have considered the words, yuvsinsscry Swesery, a8 comprising * the 
‘s dowry of wives,” as well as other “gifts from women.” 
+ That is to say, its duration will depend on the time requisite to 


174 | PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, [Book IV. 


Chapter IIL. 
The Fortune of Rank. 


' THE disposition of the luminaries and the respective famili- 
arities, exercised by the stars attending them, are to be con- 
sidered as indicative of the degree of rank or dignity *. 

For example, should the two luminaries be found in mas- 
culine signs and in angles, or even if only one.of them be 

Yn an angle ¢, they being at.the same time specially attended 
by a doryphory ¢ composed of all the five planets; the Sun 


complete the arc of direction or prorogation between the stars, ope- 
rating the loss, and the places which give the wealth. And the cal- 
culation is to be made as pointed out in the 14th and 15th Chapters 
of the Sd Book. 

* It seems that there have been different opinions on this point. 
Placidus makes the following remark on the subject; “I do not take 
“‘ the dignities from the horoscope, but from the Sun and Mediunr 
“ Coeli, according to Ptolemy and others.” (Cooper’s Translation, 
p. 121.) 

+ The Perugio Latin, of 1646, says, “if either both luminaries, or’ 
«“ only that one of the chief quality” (which Whalley defines to be 
the Sun by day, and the Moon by night) “ be in an angle,” &c. 

+ Doryphory. Vide Chapter 5 of the 3d Book. On the present pas- 
- sage, Placidus has the following words: ‘“ You are not to observe 
“6 what is generally alledged by professors, respecting. the satellites” 
(quast doryphory) “ of the luminaries, for dignities; viz. that the sa- 
“ tellites are those planets which are found within 30°, on either side 
‘* of the luminaries ; but that a satellite is [also] any-kind of aspect 
<< of the stars to the luminaries of what kind soever: which, if it be 
. * made by application, its power extends.inwardly over the whole orb 
« of light of the aspecting planet, and the more so, as the proximity is 
“¢ ‘greater ; but, by separation, itis notso. ‘This doctrine may be seen 
- “ in several chapters of Ptolemy ; for, an aspecting star influences the 
“ significator, and disposes him to produce effects co-natural to him, 
“ by a subsequent direction. Buta star of no aspect does not pre- 
“ dispose the significator, and produces very little, or no effect of its 
- “ nature, by a subsequent direction; this is the true doctrine of the 
“ stars.” (Cooper’s Translation, pp. 124, 125.) 


Chap. IIT.} PTOLEMY’S: TETRABIBLOS, 175 


by such as are oriental, but the: Moon by occidental, the 

' persons then about to be born will consequently become 
kings or princes. And, if the attendant stars themselves 
should also be in angles, or configurated with the angle above 
the earth*, the said persons will become great, gowerful, and 
mighty in the world: and even yet more ‘abundantly SO, 
provided the configurations, made by the attendant stars with 
the angles above the earth, be dexter. But, when both lu- 
minaries may not be found in masculine signs as aforesaid, - 
but the Sun only in a masculine and the Moon in a feminine 
sign, and only one of them posited in an angle, the other 
concomitant circumstances still existing in the mode above 
described, the persons about to be born will then become 
merely chieftains, invested with the roa of life and 
death. 

And if the attendant sabes while the luminaries may be 
situated in the manner last-mentioned, should be neither ac- 
tually in angles, nor bear any testimony to the angles, the 
persons then born, although they will still enjoy eminence, 
will attain only some limited dignity or distinction ; such as 
that of a delegated governor, or commander of an army, or 
dignitary of the priesthood; and they will not be. invested - 
with sovereignty. 

If, however, neither of the luminaries be in an angle, and 
it happen that most of the attendant stars be either them- 
selves in angles, or configurated with the angles, the persons 
then born will not attain to any very eminent rank ; yet they 
will take a\leading part in ordinary civil and municipal affairs : 
but, should the attendant stars have no configuration with the: 
angles, they will then remain altogether undistinguished and 
without advancement ; and provided, further, that neither of 
the luminaries be found situated in a masculine sign, nor in 
an angle, nor be atte by any benefics, they ashe be eon 
to complete obscurity adversity. 


- -* The angle of fe mid-heaven; see tle first note te this — 


176 ' ss PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOs. =§ [Book IV. 


The general appearance-of exaltation or waco rank 
is to be contemplated as before stated, but there many 
gradations intermediate to those already specified, and re- 
quiring observation of the particular interchanges and varia- 
tions, incidgntal to the luminaries themselves and their dory- 
phory, and also to the dominion of the planets which cam- 
pose their doryphory. For instance, should the benefics, or 
stars of the same condition, exercise the chief dominion, 
the dignities to be acquired will be not only more important, 
but also more securely established: and, on the other hand, 
if-the chief dominion be claimed by the malefics, or by 
stars of an adverse condition, the dignities will be more 
subordinate, and more dangerous and evanescent. 

The species ef dignity may be. inferred by observing ‘the 
peculiar qualities of the attendant stars. And, if Saturn 
have chief dominion of the doryphory, the power and au~- 
thority derived therefrom will lead to wealth and profit: au- 
_ thority proceeding from Jupiter and Venus will be pleasura- 
_ ble, and attended by presents and honours: that proceeding 
from Mars will consist in commanding armies, in obtaining 
victories, and in over-awing the vanquished: and that prto- 
ceeding from Mercury will be intellectual, superintending 
education and study, and directing the management of bu~- 

siness, } , 


Chapter IV. 
The Quality of Employment. 


Tx dominion of the employment, or profession, is claimed 

in two quarters ; viz. by the Sun, and by the sign on.the mid-. 

heaven. : : 

- It is, ‘therefore, necessary to observe whether any planet 
may be making its oriental appearance nearest to the Sun *, 


* See the 4th Chapter of the 8th Book ¥.. Almagest, and the ta- 


. ble annexed thereto, inserted in the Appendix. @ 


Chap. 1V.] PROLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 177 


and whether any be posited in the mid-heaven ; especially, 
when also receiving the application of the Moon. And, if 
one and the same planet possess both these qualifications, 
that is to say, make its nearest appearancé to the Sun, and 
be also in the mid-heaven, that one alone must be-elected to 
determine the present inquiry : and, likewise, though the plq- 
net should not be thus doubly qualified, but only singly, in 
whichever respect, even then that planet alone must still be 
elected, provided itself alone should possess such single qua- 
lication. If, however, there should be one planet presenting 
its nearest appearance, and another in the mid-heaven con- 
ciliated with the Moon, both must then be noticed; and 
whichever of these two may have greater sway, and possess 
greater nghts of dominion, that one must be preferred. But 
where not any planet may be found so situated, neither making 
Hts appearance as above described, nor being in the midhea- 
ven, then that one, possessing the doiminion of the mid-hea-. 
vem *, is to be considered as lord of the employment: # is, 
boweve only some occasional occupation which can be thus 
denoted ; because persons, born under such a configuration, 
most commonly remain at lewure and unemployed. 

What has now been said, relates to the election of the lord 
of the employment or profession; but the species of the 
employment will be distinguished by means of the respective 
properties of the three plancts; Mars, Venus and Mercury, 
and of the signs in which they may be posited. 

Mercury, for instance, produces writers, superintendents 
of business, accomptants, teachers in the sciences, merchants 
aad bankers : also, soothsayers, astrologers, and attendents 
on sacrifices, and, in short, all who live by the exercise of li- 
teratere, and by furnishing aaa or i 5 85 
specifying the place of dominion: the Latin printed at a is, 
however, “ dominum ateipe meds coli,” which is certainly the sense 


required by the tenor of the previous instructions. Whalley also bas 
similarly rendered it. 


A 


AA 





178 |" PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IV 


well as by stipend and salary, or allowance. If Saturn bear 
testimony jointly with Mercury, persons then born. will 
become managers of the affairs of others, or interpreters of 
dreams, or willfbe engaged in temples for the purposes of 
divination, and for the sake of their fanaticism. But, if Ju- 
piter join testimony, they will be painters, orators, or plead- 
ers in argument, and occupied with eminent personages. 

Shoald Venus have dominion of the employment, she 
will cause persons to be engaged in the various perfumes of 
flowers, in unguents and wines, and also in colours, dyes, and 
in spices: thus she will produce venders of unguents, gar- 
land-makers*, wine-merchants, dealers in medical drugs, 
weavers, dealers in spices, painters, dyers, and venders of 
apparel. If Saturn add his testimony to her’s, he will cause 
persgns:to’ be employed in matters belonging to amusement 
andidecoration; and will also produce jugglers, sorcerers 
and charlatans, and alt such as practise similarly. But, if 
Jupiter join testimony with Venus, persons will become 
prize-wrestlers, and garland-wearers}, and-will be advanced 
in honour through female interest. 

Mars, ruling the employment, and being configurated with 





* Among the antients, a garland was an indispensable decoration 
at all public ceremonies, whether civil or religious, and at private 
banquets. The making of garlands was, therefore, a considerable . 
employment. 

¢ It would seem, from “ garland-wearers” being placed here in 
connection with “ prize-wrestlers” (a§avra:), that the author intended 
to’ point out persons competent to obtain the victors wreath in public 
exhibitions.—But it appears that the word ¢gspaygegos, garland-wearer, 
also signifies a person who was annually chosen by the priests to 
superintend religious ceremonies, an office similar to that of high 
priest. According to Athenzus, the Stephanephorus of Tarsos was 
invested with a purple tunic, edged or striped with white, and wore- 
- the Jatrel chaplet, which Plato, in the treatise de Legibus, describes as 
being constantly worn by these officers, although the other priests 
wore it eee during the performance of the ceremonics. is 


Chap. IV.] PIOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 179 


the Sun, will produce persons who operate by means of fire ; 
for instance, cooks, as well as those who work in copper, 
brass, and other metals, by melting, burning, and casting : 
if Mars be separated from the Sun, he will make shipwrights, 
smiths, agriculturists, stonemasons, carpenters, and subord- 
inate labourers. If Saturn bear testimony, in addition to 
Mars, persons will become mariners, workers in wells, vaults 
or mines, painters, keepers of beasts or cattle, cooks or but- 
chers, and attendants on baths or on exhibitions. And, if 
Jupiter join testimony, they will be soldiers, or ieenauieds 
collectors of revenue, innkeepers, toll-gatherers, or attend- 
ants on sacrifices. 

Further, should it happen that two arbiters of saiployaient 
may be found together, and provided they should be Mer- 
cury and Venus, they will then produce musicians, melo- 
dists, and persons engaged in music, poetry, and songs: they 
will also produce, (especially if changed in their places*), mi- 
mics, actors, dealers in slaves, makers of musical instruments, 
choristers and musical performers, dancers, weavers, model- 
lers in wax, and painters. And if Saturn join testimony 
with Mercury and Venus, the preparation and sale of female 
ornaments will be added to the aforesaid occupations. But, 
if Jupiter give testimony, the persons will become adminis- 
trators of justice, guardians of public affairs, instructors of 
youth, and magistrates of the people. 

Should Mercury and Mars together be lords of the em- 
ployment, persons will become statuaries, armour-makers, 
sculptors}, modellers of animals, wrestlers, surgeons, spies 
or informers, adulterers, busy in crime, and forgers. And, 
if Saturn also bear testimony in addition to Mercury and 
Mars, he will produce assassins, highwaymen, thieves, rob-« 





* Meaning probably “ if in mutual reception,” which Position has 
been before explained. 


t Or makers of hieroglyphice—sjep duper. 


180 PTOLEMY.S PETRABIBLOS. [Book IV. 


bers lurking in ambush, marauders on cattle, and swindters. 
But, if Jupiter afford testimony, he will engage persons m 
honourable warfare, and in industry ;. making them cautious 
and diligent in business, curions in foreign matters, and 
deriving profit from their pursuits. 

When Venus and Mars exercise the dominion together, 
persons will become dyers,-dealers in unguents and perfumes, — 
workers in tin, lead, gold, and silver, mock-combetants or 
dancers in armour, dealers in medical drugs, agricutturists, 
and: physicians, healing by means of medicine. And, if 
Saturn add testimony to Venus and Mars, he will produce 
persons attendant on animals consecrated to religion; also 
gtave-diggers and undertakers, mourners and musicians at 
funerals, and fanatics occupied in religious ceremonies, la- 
Mentations, and blood. But, if Jupiter add testimony, 
the persons will become regulators of sacrifices, augurs, 
" holders of sacred offices, governors placed over women, and 
Anterpreters ; and they will derive support from such oecu- 
pations, 

The properties of the signs, in which the lords of the em- 
ployment may be posited, are also influential im varying the 
employment. For example, the signe of human shape 

‘promote all: scientific pursuits, and such as are of utility to 
mankind; the quadrupedal signs contribute to prodace em- 
ployment anfong metals; in business and trade, in house- 
building, and in the work of smiths and mechanics: the 
tropical and equinoctial signs tend to give employment im 
translation or interpretation, in matters of exchange, in men- 
suration and agriculture, and in religious duties: the terres- 
. trial ard watery signs tend to employment in water, and in 
_ connection with water, as well in regard to the nurture of 
plants, as to ship-building ; they likewise contribute to 
employment in funerals, in embalming and preserving, aad 
. also in salt. ; 
Moreover, should the Muon herself actualy occupy the 


Chap. IV.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. * 18] 


place regulating the employment*, and, after her conjunc- 
tion, continue in course with Mercury, being at the same 
time in Taurus, Capricorn, or Cancer, she will then produce 
soothsayers, attendants on sacrifices, and diviners by the 
basint. If she be in Sagittarius or Pisces, she will make 
hecromancers, and evokers of demons: if in Virgo or 
Scorpio, magicians, astrologers, and oracular persons, -pos- 
sessing prescience: and, if in Libra, Aries, or Leo, she will 
produce fanatics, interpreters of dreams, and makers of falag 
vows and adjurations. | 
From the foregoing rules, the various forms of employ- 
ment are to be inferred ; and its magnitude or importance 
will be manifested by the existing power of the ruling pla- 
nets. For instance, if the said planets be oriental, or in 
angles, they will give the person eminence and authority in 
his ermployment ; but, if accidental or cadent, they will ren- 
der him-subordinate. And should the benefics be in eleva- 
tion, the employment will be important, lucrative, secure, 
honourable, and agreeable; but, on the other hand, if the 
malefics be in elevation above the lords of the employment, 
it will then be mean, disreputable, unprofitable, and insecure: 
thus, Saturn brings an adverse influence in coldness or tardi- 





* That is to say, the mid-heaven; as stated in the 4th Chapter of 
the 3d Book, and inthe commencement of the present Chapter, 

+ This mode of divination, as practised by the Greeks, is mention- 
_ ed by Potter. It is likewise described bya learned Doctor of Medi. 
cine, Geo. Pictorius Vigillanus, (in his Treatise “de Speciebus Ma- 
gize Ceremonialis,” printed at Strasburgh, 1531,) as being used 
“when the fraudulent vanity of a demon renders things more like 
“ each other than eggs aro to eggs.” And, according to this writer, 
it is practised by exorcising water, and pouring it into a basin, where- 
in the vain and refractory deemon is immersed :—the said damon wit 
sometimes romain at the bottom, and sometimes raise himself te the 
surface, sending forth a slender hissing ; eut ’ which tho esired 
_responses are to be formed. sh 





182 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IV. 


ness, and in the composition or mixture of colours*; and 
Mars produces opposition by audacity and publicity in enter- 
prise: and both planets are alike hostile to proficiency and 
prosperity. 

The. general period, at which any increase or diminution © 
- of the employment may ‘take place, must, again in this case. 
also, be determined by the disposition of the stars, which. 
operate the effect, towards the oriental and occidental angles, 


. Chapter V. 

Marriage. 
Tue consideration of circumstances relating to marriage, or 
the cohabitation of husband and wife, as sanctioned by law, 
"succeeds to the foregoing details, and must be pursued in 
the following method. 

With regard to men, jt is to be observed in what manner 
the Moon may be disposed ; for, in the first place, if she be 
found in the oriental quadrants, she will cause men either to 
marry early in life, or, after having over-passed their prime, to 
marry young women ; ° but, should she be situated in either 
‘¢ of the occidental quadrants, men will then marry either 
‘© Jate in life, or to women advanced in aget:” and if she 
be found under the Sun’s beams, and configurated with | 
Saturn, she then entirely denies marriage. Secondly, should 
she be in a sign of single form, and in application to only 
one of the planets, she will cause men to marry only 
once; but, if she be in a bicorporeal or multiform sign, or 





* Keacsos twv xpeparey.— These words have been rendered literally, 
but they seem to contain some figurative meaning, rather than a 
literal one. Perhaps the preferable sense of them is, “by a mixture of 
views,” or “from various pursuits being blended together.” | 

+ The words marked with inverted commas, are not in the Greek ; 
they are found, however, in two Latin translations ; that of Basle, 1541, 
and that of Perugiv, 1646. 


_ Chap. V-) PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. — 183 


in application to several planets, she will cause them to be 
married several times; and, provided also that the planets, | 
which thus, either by adjacency or by testimony*, receive 
her application, be benefic, men will then obtain good wives ; 
but if, on the contrary, the said planets be,malefic, bad. 
For example, if Saturn receive the Moon’s application, 
the wives whom he will provide will be troublesome and 
morose ; but, if Jupiter receive it, they will bé decorous 
and ceconomical; if Mars, bold and refractory ; if Venus, 
cheerful, handsome, and agreeable ; and, if Mercury, sensi- 
ble, prudent, and clever. Moreover, should Venus be found 
connected with Jupiter, Saturnt, or Mercury, she will ren- 
der wives provident, and attached to their husbands and 
children ; but, if she be found connected ‘with Mars, they 
will be ctaseible; unsteady, and indiscreet.—Thus far in 
reference to the marriage of men. ‘ 

_ But, in the case of women, the Sun must be observed, 
instead of the Moon : and, should he be posited in the orien- 
tal quadrants, women will be married either in their own 
youth, or to men younger than themselves; but, if he be in 
the occidental quadrants, they will either be married late in 
life, or to men who have passed their prime, and are advanced - 
in years. And should the Sun be in a sign of single form, 
or configurated with only one oriental planet, he will cause 
them to enter into matrimony only once; but, if in a bicor- 
poreal or multiform sign, or configurated with several orien- 
tal planets, he will then cause them to be often married. 
And Saturn, being configurated with the Sun, will provide 
husbands stedfast, advantageous, and industrious ; Jupiter, 
such as are honourable and noble-minded; Mars, severe - 
husbands, yoid of affection and intractable; Venus, amiable °. 





* In other copies, “ witether by conjunction or aspect.” 
+ “ Saturn.” Not found in the Elzevir edition, but in others. 


184 _ PTOLEMY’S TRTRABIBLOS. [Book iV. 


. and handsome husbands; and Mercury, such as are provi- 

dent and expert in business. But, if Venus be found con- 
nected with Saturn, she will indicate dull and timid husbands ; 
‘¢ if with Jupiter, the husbands will be good, just, and uae 
st dest * ;”’ if with Mars, hasty, lustful, and adulterous; and 
if with Mercufy, they will be extravagantly desirous of young 
personst. - 

In regard to the Sun, those quadrants which precede the 
ascending and descending points of the zodiac, and, in re- - 
spect of the Moon, those which are measured from her | 
conjunction.and opposition ¢ to her intermediate quarters, 
are called oriental quadrants: the occidental quadrants are, 
of course, those lying opposite to the oriental. 

‘Whenever both nativities, viz. that of ‘the husband and 
that of the wife, may exhibit the luminaries configurated to- 
gether in concord, that is to say, either in trine or in sextile 
to each other, the cohabitation will most usually be lasting ; 
especially if the said concord exist by means of interchange § ; 
but its duration will be also much more securely established, 
provided the Moon in the husband’s nativity should corre- 
spond or agree with the Sun.in the wife’s nativity 4. If, how- 
ever, the relative positions of the kaminaries be in signs in- 
conjunct, or m opposition, or in quartile, the cohabitation 
will be speedily dissolved upon slight causes, and the total 
separation of the parties will ensue. 


* The words thus marked * ” are not found ia the Elzevir edition, 
bat appear ia the Latin one of Baste, 1541. 
-  $ Sag watac ew Bopunnewe. 

{ That is to say, from the new and the full Moon. | 

§ By mutual reception ; according to Whalley, and alse according 
to the Latin copy of Perugio, 1646. - ar 

\| Meaning, probably, if the Moon in a Seon nativity should 
be in the same position as the Sun in the wife's nativity, or fartnoni- 
ously configurated with that position. ‘ | 

< 


Chap. V.j PYOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 185 


And should the configuration of the luminaries, when made 
in concord, be aspected by the benefics, the cohabitation will 
continue in respectability, comfort, and advantage; but, on 
the other hand, it will abound in strife, contention, and mis- 
fortune, if the malefics be in aspect to the, said configura- 
tion. 

In like mammer, even though the luminaries may not be 
favourably configurated in concord, should the benefics still 
offer testimony to them, the cohabitation will then not be 
entirely broken off, nor totally destroyed for ever, but will be 
again renewed, and re-established as before. But if, on the 
contrary, the malefics bear testimony to such discordant dis- 
position of the lummaries, a dissolution of the cohabitation 
will take place, accompanied by scorn and injury. Sheuld 
Mercury alone be conjoined with the matefics, it will be effect- 
ed by means of some public inculpation ; and if Venus also be 
found with them, it will be on the ground of scene or 
sorcery, or some similar offence. 

There are, however, other vaweties in the married state, 
‘ which areto be contemplated by means of Venus, Mars and 
Satum. And showld these planets act in familiarity with the 
laminaries, the cohabitation will be appropriate and domes- 
tic, and authorised by law; because Venus holds a certain af- 
: fimity both to Mars atid Saturn: her affinity to Mars, for in- 
stance, consists in each having exaltation in a sign belonging 
to the other’s triplicity *, and it operates in the cases of 
youthful and vigorous persons: while her afinity to Saturn 
arises from their respective houses being in signs, again also, 


belonging to each other’s triplicity¢, and relates to persons of 
more advanced age. 





* The exaltation of Venus being in Pisees, and that of Mars in 
Capricorn. Vide Cheptérs 21 and 22, Book 1. 

+ Libra being Venas’s house, and in-Saturn’s triplicity ; and Capri- 
corn being Saturn’s house, and in Venus’s triplicity. oe Chapters 
20 and 21, Book 1. 


BB 


ei um 2. 


[86 PTOLEMY S TETRABIBLOS. [ Book IV.: 


Hence, if Venus be in concurrence with Mars, she will 
produce entire love and affection in the cohabiting parties; and. 
‘if Mercury also coincide with the said planets, such affec- 
tion will become publicly notorious. Should Venus be found: 
in a sign mutuajly common and familiar, such as Capricorn, 
or Pisces*, she will effect marriages between brothers and. 
sisters and kindred by blood : and, provided she be also in the 
presence of the Moon, when the native may be male, she. 
will cause him to connect himself with two sisters, or other 
near relatives; but, if the native be a female, a similar con-- 
tract on her part, with two brothers or near relatives, will be. 
indicated, when Venus may be also with Jupitert. 3 

Again, if Venus be with Saturn, the cohabitation will 
be established entirely in happiness and constancy; and if 
Mercury be present with them, it will be profitable; but, 
should Mars be present, it will be unsettled, calamitous, and: 
afflicted by jealousy. And if Mars be configurated on equal 
terms with Venus, Saturn, and Mercury, he will effect mar-- 
lage between persons of equal age ;. but, on the other hand, 
should he be more oriental, marriage will take place with a: 
younger man or woman; and, if more occidental, with an 
older person. Should Venus and Saturn be. found in signs 
common to each other, that is to say, in Capricorn and Li- 
brat, marriage will be contracted between persons kindred by 
blood: and, when the said position may happen in the as-: 
cendant, or in the mid-heaven, provided the Moon also should’ 
present herself there, men will become connected with their 
mothers, or maternal aunts, or. with their mothers in law; 
and women with their own sons, or the sons of their brothers, 
or with their daughters’ husbands. But if, instead of the 
Moon, the Sun should be in concurrence with the said posi- 
tion, and especially should it also happen that the planets in 





* Vide Note * in p. 185. © t Instead of the Moon. 
¢ Vide Note ft in p. 185. , 


Chap. V.]| _ PYTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 187 


question may be occidental, men will then-cqnnect themselves 
with their daughters, or the wives of their sons; and women 
with their fathers, or paternal uncles, or the husbands of their 
daughters. 
“When the aforesaid configurations*, although not existing 
in signs of ‘affinity to each otherf, should be found in fe- 
minine places, they will render the parties obscene, lustful 
and shameless ; for instance, when found in the anterior.and 
hinder parts of Aries, and near the Hyades of Taurus, abaut 
the urn of Aquarius, in the hinder parts of Leo, and in the 
face of Capricorn. And should the last named planets, Ve- 
nus and Saturn, be posited in angles, they will then, if po- 
sited in the first two angles, the eastern and southern, pro- 
duce a total exposure of the. passions, and cause them to be 
publicly canvassed; but, if in the last two angles, the west- 
ern and northern, they will produce eunuchs, or persons un- 
prolific, and not possessing the proper channels of nature. . 
The passions, liable to operate in males, are to be consi- 
dered by observation of Mars:. for should he be separated 
trom Venus and Saturn, but yet, at the same time, be sup- 
ported by the testimony of Jupiter, he will make men pure 
and decorous in sexual intercourse, and incline them to natu- 
ral usages only: and, if he attach himself to Saturn only, he 
will render them cold in blood and dull in appetite ; if, how- 
ever, when Saturn and Mars may be thus connected together, 
Venus and Jupiter should also be configurated with them, 
men will then become easily excited and eager in desire, al- 
though they will still be continent, and restrain themselves 
in order to avoid reproach. But should Saturn be absent, 
and Mars be with Venus alone, or even although Jupiter 





* Of the planets before specified. 

t These are such signs as are connected with each other in | any 
manner similar to that before described, as connecting Capricorn with 
Pisces, and with Libra; or, in other words, signs common.to the pla-, 
nets configurated. 


~~: 
a: Les ge ee nen - - 


136 PTOLEMY’S BETRABIBLOS. [Book IV. 


also be with her, nzen will beceme highly licentious, and at- 

 temipt to gratify their desives in every mode*.—And further, 
if Venus be found more occidental, men will connect them- 
selves with low women, female servants, and aliens or vaga- 
bonds; but, should Mars be found oecidental, with women 
of rank and gentlewomen ; or with women living with their 
husbaards, or under the protection of men.—Thus far with 
regard to males. 

In the case of females, Venus. requires attention :. for, if 
she be configurated with Jupiter, or with Mercury, she wil 
cause women to be temperate and pure in sexual intercourse ; 
still, however, when she may be thus cénnected: with Mer- 
cury, if Saturn be not present aleo, she will cause them to 
be easily excited to. desire; although they will costrout their 
desires, and avoid reptoach.. But, should Venas be conjoined 


or configurated with Mars alone, she will render women It- 


centious and lustful ;. and if,.to both these planets, when thus 


conjoined or configurated, Jupiter also present himself, Mars 
being at the same time under the rays of the Sun, women 
wil then mingle in tmtercourse with servants, and: persons 
meaner than themselves, or with aliens, or vagabonds : but, 
should it happen that Venus may be under the rays of the 
Sun, they will then. connect themselves with their superiors 
or masters. And, further, should the planets be in feminine 


places, or configurated femininely, they: will be content with 
their passive faculties onlyt. 





* The following passage also occurs.here: “ sas ss yay 0 816 Ter 
acepwy Surinoc, 0 8s erepo avarToARoe ECt, Kat Meog Bvepas Ras yuvainae sTorTas 
Trameiwaves, cure’ vwrepCorieee 22, 1 Bs augorepes os acepec Svrines cupelwet, Weer 
feover ve Sudv everras xarapepnc. Snkvzer dr roy Cwhov orapyevrey fy bic ot 
GCECEC, Ras auTOL Warysy areLorTas Ta TH-Dhauveg. 262s apeperters avaveAing act, 
Weoe peovey To arpay ogsamtineg shuct. sav 8s Codi. agereweey cream, erg Navay 
agosvixny wAimiay.”” 


t To this the following sentence succecds: tas Be agua dre msepeares 
WoL OL AEEPEC, Mas TeOg TO TreLELY. 


\e 


Chap. VE.] . PTOLEMY’s TETRABIBLOS. - 189 


. Saturn, in being conciltated with such positions as those 
now described, contributes to produce greater obscenity ; 


Jupiter, greater decency; and Mercury, greater _— ; 
and Breater fickleness, or instability. 


Chapter VI. 
Children. 
THE next point to be investigated is that concerning children : 
and, to accomplish this, observation must be made of the 
_ planets posited in, or configurated with the place on the #e- 
nith*, or its succedent house, which latter is called the place of 
the'good demon. And should it happen that not any pla- 
nets may be present in the said places, nor configurated with 
them, it will then be necessary to take into consideration 
such as may be im opposition thereto. 

Now the Moon, Jupiter, and Venus are esteemed as givers 
of offspring ; but the Sun, Mars, and Saturn are considered 
as denying children altogether, or as allowing but few: while 
Mercury, being in quality common to both parties, lends 
co-operation to that with which he may be configurated, and’ ° 
gives offspring, when oriental, but withholds, when occiden:' 
tal, | 

To speak briefly, if the planets, which grant progeny, be 
so posited as described}, and placed singly, the gift of .Pro- 
geny will be single only} ; but should they be in bieorporeal: 
or in fenminine signs, they will grant double offspring§ $0 
likewise if they should be im prolific or seminal signs, such 





. * The angle of the mid-heaven, 

+ The meaning, apparent from the commeacement of the chapter, 
is this :—“ should such planets be in the mid-heaven or its succedent 
“ house, or configurated with either.” 

q Meradiens, single, or one at a birth. 

§ Aidysoyanay, double, or two at a birth. 


190 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. {Book 1V. 


as Pisces, Cancer and Scorpio, they will grant twins, or even 
more. And provided they should also be masculinely con- 
stituted, as well by configuration with the Sun, as by being in 
masculine signs, they will grant male children; but other- 
wise, if femininely constituted, female. 

But, although the said planets, even if beneath the male- 
fics in elevation, or, even if found in barren places, or in 
signs such as those of Leo and Virgo, will still grant chil- 
dren; yet such children, thus indicated,. will neither be 
healthy, nor continue in life. Should it happen, however, 
that the Sun and the malefics may be in entire possession of 
the places above mentioned, viz. that on the zenith, or the 
succedent house allotted to the good demon; and provided 
they be, at the same time, in masculine or barren signs, and 
the benefics be not in elevation above them, a total privation 
of offspring is thereby indicated ; but, should they be in fe- 
- minine or prolific signs, or supported by the testimony of the 
benefics, children will then be granted ; yet they will be hia- 
ble to disease, and short-lived. 

If, however, planets of each condition should be configu- 
rated with, and have prerogative in prolific signs, there will 
then ensue a loss of either all the children, or only few, or 
else the major part of them; in the same proportion as that 
in which the planets, bearing testimony to either condition, 
may preponderate on one side rather than the other; by ex- 
celling in number, or in influence, in consequence of being 
posited more orientally, more genuinely in angles, higher in 
elevation, or successively ascending. 

When the lords of the aforesaid signs* may be such as are 
givers of offspring, and be either oriental, or in places pro- 
per to themselves, the children thus granted will become 
eminent and illustrious: but, if occidental, or in places not 





* That on the mid-heaven, and that on the cleventh house. 


Chap. VI.) PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 191 


proper to themselves, the children will then become undis-- 
tinguished and abject. Should the said lords also be in con- 
cord with the part of fortune, and with the ascendant, they 
will render the children amiable, and cause them to be be-: 
loved by their parents, and to inherit their parents’ substance: - 
but, if found inconjunct, and not in concord with the said: 
parts, the children will then become odious and mischievous 
to their parents, and will forfeit the inheritance of their sub- 
stance. 

Further, should the planets which grant progeny be ap- 
propriately configurated with each other, they will promote: 
brotherly love, and mutual regard and affection among the 
children ; but, if inconjunct, or in opposition, they will ex- 
cite in them mutual hatred, deceit, and treachery. 

The general investigation regarding children 1s to be con~ 
ducted in the foregoing method: but, in order to enquire 
into particular circumstances consequent on the above, it will. 
be necessary to assume, as an ascendant, the position of 
each planet which gives offspring, and to observe the sepa- 
rate schemes; drawing inferences therefrom as in the case of 
a nativity. 


@hapter VII. 
Friends and Enemies. 


Wiru respect to friendship and enmity, it may be observed 
that great and lasting familiarities, or disagreements, are re- 
spectively called sympathies and enmities; while the smaller, 
such as arise occasionally, and subsist for a short time only, | 
are denominated casual intimacies and strifes: the whole are 
to be contemplated according to the following rules. 
Indications of great and lasting friendships, or enmities, 
may be perceived by observation of the ruling places, exhi- 
bited in the respective nativities of both the persons, be- 
tween whom the friendship or enmity may subsist. . It is 


192 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, [Book IV. 


consequently essential to observe the places of the Sun, the 
Moon, the ascendant, and the part of fortune ; for, should 
all ‘these in both nativities be in the same signs, or should 
either all or most of them be counterchanged in position in 
each nativity, and especially should the two asgendants be 
within the distance of seventeen degrees from each other *, 

they will create fixed and indissoluble friendship. On the 
other hand, should they be in signs inconjunct, or in oppo- 
sition, they will produce great and lasting enmity. If,-how- 
ever, they be not constituted in either of the modes above- 
mentioned, but merely configurated in signst, they will then 
produce minor friendship; provided such configuration exist 
by trine or sextile; but, if by quartile, they will excite minor 
enmity, so as to take effect at certain particular times, in 
which the friendship remains, as it were, inactive and sub- 
dued, while the malefics transit the configuration: and, in 
a similar manner, enmity also will be softened and abated, 
' when the benefics may enter upon the configuration {. 

The friendship and enmity, which men bear towards each 
other,-may be classed under three general heads. One kind 
is suggested by spontaneous wilfulness; another, by the idea 
of profits; and another, by pain and pleasure mutually ex- 
cited. ‘ | 

And, therefore, should either all or most of the aforesaid 
places be in familiarity with each other, friendship of al] the 
three kinds will be established: so, also, should the places 
be entirely without familiarity, similar enmity will be esta-. 
bfished. {f, however, familiarity, or absence of familiarity, 
(as the case may be) exist only as regards | the Places of the 





* Or, regard each other within the distance of seventeen degrees. 

+ That is to say ;if the places of the Sun, &c. in one nativity be 
configurated with, such parts of the zodiac as are occupied by the Sun, 
&e. in the other nativity. 


T Of any of the four places above specified. 


Chap. VII.} PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 193 


luminaries, friendship or enmity will then be established by 
spontaneous will; and friendship thus produced is the best 
and most secure; while, on the other hand, enmity so aris- 
ing is, in like manner, the worst and most dangerous. The 
friendship, or enmity, consequent on the familiarity or non- 
familiarity of the respective parts of Fortune, will be esta- 
blished on the idea of profit; and that, consequent on a si- 
milar disposition of the respective ascendants, will arise from — 
pain or pleasure mutually excited between the parties. 

It will, however, be necessary to pay still further attention 
to the places in question, in order to observe whether any 
and what planets may be in elevation above them, or in as- 
pect to them; because, among all the said places, that par- 
ticular one, to which any planet j in elevation, or in succes- 
sion, may be adjacent, whether in the same sign, or in . the 
next, will possess the more powerful influence over friend- 
ship or enmity: and whichever place may have its aspecting 
planets more powerfully benefic, will operate in a greater de- 
gree* to advantage in friendship, and to the relaxation of 
enmity.—The foregoing instructions are applicable to such 
friendships or enmities as are great and lasting. 

But, in the case of others, which subsist only occasiohally, 
and which have been defined as casual intimaca and strifes, 
it is essential to make observation’ of the motions of the 
planets, as exhibited by each nativity; that is ta say, the times 
are to be calculated, on the completion of which the motions 
of the planets of one nativity will cause them to enter on 
certain places of the other nativity; for it is at such pe- 
riods that certain particular friendships and enmities occur, 
- continuing for a short time, until the said ingress of the 
planets shall have passed over. 

For instance, Saturn and Jupiter, when making ingress 
upon each other’s places, produce friendship by certain agree- 
ments} or engagements, relating either to agriculture or to in- 


* Than the rest of the pee: 
cc 


194 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. { Book I'V. 


heritan¢e : Saturn and Mars create contention and treachery 
spontaneously entertained: Saturn and Venus, friendship be- 
tween kindred ; liable, however, soon to grow cool: Saturn 
and Mercury, friendship on account of business, or profit, 
or some secret art or mystery. 

Jupiter and Mars create friendship in the direction of affairs, 
and by means of dignities; Jupiter and Venus also create 
friendship by means of female persons, or attendants on reli- 
gion, or on oracles: Jupiter and Mercury, friendship by means 
of eloquence and science, and philosophical inclinations. 

Mars and Venus cause friendship in the course of amours, 
adultery and fornication: Mars and Mercury excite hatred 
and strife by offences committed in business and trade, or 
by sorcery. 

.. And Venus and Mercury produce communion by means 
of the arts and sciences, by a mutual interest in literature, 
or by female persons. . 

It is in this manner that the planets operate in producing 
friendship or enmity. And their comparative intensity or 
relaxation of vigour is to be distinguished by the situation 
of the places, which they occupy, with regard to the four 
principal and ruling places*: for, should they be posited in 
angles, at the ‘places of the respective parts of Fortune, or at 
‘those of the luminaries, they will render the casual intima- 
cies or strifes more eminent and remarkable; but, if they be 
remote from these places, their effects will not be highly 
conspicuous. The comparative degree of injury or advan- 
tage, liable to be received, is to be discerned by means of 
the good or evil properties of such planets as may be thus 
in aspect to the aforesaid places. 

With respect to servants, the sign of the evil demon { 
fore-mentioned. ° 

+— “and the attachment, or disagronments subsisting between them 
‘and their masters :”’—~so Allatius, and the Latin translation printed 


at Perngio. 
rt The twelfth house. 


Chap. VIII.] §rroLEMy’s TETRABIBLOS. - | 195 


is considered as the place to which the disposition ruling 
over them must be referred; and it is to be observed what 
planets are in aspect ta that place, both at the actual time of 
nativity, and at that of any ingresses made upon it, Or Opposi- 
tions to it; and also, especially, whether the lords of the said . 
sign may be configurated 1 in familiarity with the ruling places 
of the nativity, or not in familiarity. 


Chapter VIII. 
Travelling. 

Tue circumstances indicative of travel are to be considered 
by means of the situation held by both the luminaries, in 
respect to the angles, and, especially » by means of that held 
by.the Moon. For, should she be descending, or cadent 
from the angles, she will cause journies and changes of resi- 
dence: Mars, also, if descending, or cadent from the zenith, 
will sometimes do the same, provided he may occupy 4d situ- 
ation in quartile, or in opposition to the luminaries. And, 
if the part of Fortune, also, should happen to be. placed in 
signs which produce travelling, the course and practice of 
the whole life will be engaged in foreign lands. And further, 
provided the benefics superintend the aforesaid places, or 
ascend in succession to them, the engagements abroad will be 
honourable and lucrative, and the return home speedy and 
unobstructed: but if, on the contrary, the malefics superin- 
tend or ascend in succession to those places, the journey out- 
ward will then Jead to peril and misfortune, and the return 
will be replete with difficulty. But it is, at the same time, 
necessary in all cases to consider the contemperament also, 
and to observe such of the existing configurations as are more 
predominant. 

It most usually happens, that, if the luminaries be posited 
in the cadent houses of the oriental quadrants, the travel 
will take place in the eastern or southern quarters’ of the 


-~ 4 4 





196 _ PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IV. 


world; and that, if placed in western situations, or in an 
occidental quadrant, travel, will be then prosecuted in the - 
northern or western parts. And, should the signs, which 
operate travel, be themselves single in form, or should the 
planets, having dominion of them, be singly posited, the 
journies wil then take place after long intervals, and occa- 
sionally only: but, if the said signs be bicorporeal, or double 
in form or figure, travel will be constantly repeated and con- 
tinued. | 
Thus, when Jupiter and Venus may be in dominion over 
the luminaries, and over the places producing travel, they 
_will render the journies agreeable, as well as free from dan- 
ger: for the traveller will be joyfully forwarded on his way 
by the magistrates of the country, and by the concurrent 
assistance of friendly persons; the state of the atmosphere 
will also be favourable, and he will meet with abundance of 
accommodation. And, provided Mercury also be present 
with the planets above-specified, utility, profit, presents and 
honours will likewise be derived from the journey. | 
Saturn and Mars, if controuling the luminaries, and, 
especially, if placed distantly from each other*, will produce 
‘great dangers, and at the same time render the J journey fruits. 
less and unavailing. Should they be in watery signs, the | 
dangers will arise by. shipwreck, or among deserts and wil- 
dernessest ;. if in fixed signs, by precipices, and adverse blasts 
of wind ; in tropical and equinoctial signs, by want of food - 
and other necessaries, and by some unwholesome state of- 
the atmosphere; in signs of human form, by robbery, 
‘treachery, and various depredations; and, if in terrestrial: 
signs, by me attack of wild beasts, or from earthquakes. 


* The probable meaning is, “ if not acting in concert :” but the : 
Latin_of Perugia says, “ si sint oppositi secundum longitudinem.” 
t There. seems a mis-print here in_ the original? doewher, “ foul 
“ vapours,” instead of tucedwy, “ wildernesses.”: 








Chap. 1X.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. _ 197 
And, should Mercury also lend concurrence, the traveller 
will incur further danger from accusations made against him, 
as well as from reptiles and venomous stings or bites. 

The question, whether the events will be advantageous or 
injurious in quality, must, however, be further considered’ 
by observation (made in the forms already detailed), of the 
peculiar properties of the places, in which the lords of em- 
ployment, of wealth, of the body, or of rank, may be po- 
sited. And the periods, at-which travelling will take place, 
are to -be considered by the occasional ingress of the five 
planets*. 


Chapter IX. 


The Kind of Death. 


Ir now remains to treat-of the kind and species of death.— 
It is, however, first to be determined, by the rules already: 
delivered regarding the duration of lifet, whether death - will: 
ensue from an oriental or occidental position of the pre- 

dominating influence. And, if death ensue from some: 
oriental position, or meeting of rays, the place of such meet+: 
ing.must be observed, and by means of that place the kind: 
_ of death is to be distinguished ; if from the descension, or 
setting, of the significator,’ or prorogator, the: place of: de- 

scension{ must be consideted: because death is to be expected 
conformable in character to the influences; whatever they. may! 
be, which preside over the said places; or, if not any influences: 
should directly preside, it will then be conformable to the'in- 

fluences, of whatever kind, which may be brought first in su: . 
cession to the places in question: the-configuration of thei! 
stars, the property of the aforesaid anzretic places, and the na- 





* On the places indicative of travelling: 

+ Vide the 14th’Chapter of the 3d Book ; on the number of the - 
modes of prorogation: . 

} That is to say, the sign and degree on the occidental horizon 


re ie ame Li, Le | 
3 . ee . SS tayo cm 


198 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IV. 
ture of the signs and of the terms*, are, also, all of them 
co-operative. 


Thus, for example, if the dominion of death be vested 
in Saturn, he will produce death by means of lingering 
diseases; cough, rheumatism, flux, ague, disorder of the 
spleen, dropsy, cholic, and complaints in the womb; and, 
in short, by all such diseases as proceed from the super- 
abundance of cold. 

Jupiter effects death by quinsey, inflammation of the lungs, 
apoplexy, ‘spasm, pains in the head, morbid performance of 
the heart, and by all diseases arising from the superabun- 
dance of air, and from immoderate and impure respiration. 

Mars causes death by constant fevers, semitertians, sudden 
and spontaneous wounds, diseases of the kidnies, expectora- 
tion of blood, and hasmorrhages of various kinds; by mis- 
carriage, or abortion, and by child-birth, by erysipelas, and, 


in short, by such diseases as proceed from abundant and im- 


moderate heat. 
Venus produces death by disorders of the stomach, and 
of the liver, by scurvy and dysentery: also by.consumption 


- or wasting away, and by fistula and poison, and by all dis- 


eases incident on the superabundance or poverty of moisture, 
and its corruption. 

Lastly, Mercury causes death to proceed from fury, mad- 
ness, melancholy, epilepsy, falling fits, coughs, and obstruc- 
tions, and by such diseases as arise from superabundant or 
disproportionate dryness. 

When the lords of death may fully possess their own pe- 
culiar and natural properties, and when neither of the male- 
fics. may be in elevation above them, death will ensue in the 


.* See a subsequent note, p. 199, which gives an instance of the 


" mode in which Placidus applied the power of the terms, in. an 


anzretic direction. 
t 4a enjoy, Perhaps more properly, putridity or rottenness. The 
Perugio Latin translation.renders it by ‘“ cancer.” ‘ 


= 


— Chap. TX?) PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS, 199 


modes above detailed, and in the ordinary course of nature. 
But a violent and remarkable death will occur when both 
the malefics, either in conjunction, or in quartile or oppo- 
sition to each other, may be lords of the anzeretic places ; 
or if both, or only one of the two, should attack either both 
the luminaries, or even only the Sun or the Moon. In such 
a case, the evil character of the death will proceed from the 
concurrence of the malefic influence, and its magnitude or 
remarkable nature from the additional testimony of the lu- 
minaries : its quality, also, will be known: by means of the 
rest of the planets and stars in configuration, and by the 
signs which contain the malefic influence*. 

Hence, if it happen that Saturn be in fixed signs, and in 
quartile or opposition to the Sun, and contrary in condition, 
he will produce death by suffocation, occasioned either by 


multitudes of people, or by hanging or strangulation: 80, _. 


likewise, should he be occidental, and the Moon be succe- 
dent to him, he will operate the same effects. If he be 
posited in places or signs of bestial form, the native will be 
destroyed by wild beasts: and, if Jupiter also offer testi- 
mony, being at the same time badly afflicted, the death will 
then occur in public, and by day; for example, by being 
exposed to combats with wild beasts. If Saturn be posited 





* Placidus, in treating of the nativity of Lewis, Cardinal Zachia, 
uses these words: “This example also teaches us what the senti- 
‘‘ ments of Ptolemy were concerning a violent death; when, ina pe- 
“‘ remptory place, both the enemies meet together, it is to be under- 
“‘stood, that in the nativity the violence is sometimes first pre- 
“ordained from the unfortanate position of the Apheta; at other 


“< times quite the contrary. But, because the direct direction hap- - 


‘‘ pened to be in the terms of Mercury, the sickness was attended 
“with a delirium and lethargy, so that you may perceive this to have 
“ been the true ‘cause of the native’s death.” (Cooper’s Translation, 


N 


s 
. 7 
s 
. 
nna ts to TO Rene Oe: eee aE ee denen en, 
. eee ie. Os _ 


.—— ee ge ee 


ae . oa we Pra = . “'g0% 


200 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [ Book IV. 


in opposition to either of the luminaries in the ascendant*, 
he will cause death in prison: if he be configurated with 
Mercury, : and especially if néar the constellation of the Ser- 
pent in the sphere, and in terrestrial signs ofthe zodiac, he 
will produce death by venomous wounds or bites, and by 
reptiles and wild beasts. And, should Venus also attach her- 
self to Saturn and Mercury thus combined, death will then 
ensue by poison or female treachery. If Saturn be in Virgo 
or Pisces, or watery signs, and configurated with the Moon, 
he will operate death by means of water, by drowning and _ 
suffocation ; and, if found near Argo, by shipwreck. Should 
he be in tropical or quadrupedal signs, and the Sun be either 
in conjunction with him, or in opposition; or if, instead 
of.the Sun, Mars should so present himself, death will be 
caused by the fall of houses or buildings ; and, if posited in 
the mid-heaven, death will happen by falls from herghts or 
precipices.——These are the various effects of Saturn, when 
configurated as described. 

Mars, if in signs of human form, ‘and posited in quartile 
or in opposttion to the Sun or Moon, and contrary in con- 
dition, will operate death by slaughter, either in civil or 
foreign war, or by suicide: if Venus add her testimony, 
death will be inflicted by women, or by assassins in the — 
employment of women : and, should Mercury also be con- 
figurated with them, death will happen from robbers, thieves, 
or highwaymen. If Mars be in mutilated or imperfect signs, 
or near the Gorgonf of Perseus, he will produce death by 





* Bids ayOwgornonncts negoreey Bnecle sev geray: which Allatias has 
translated, ‘if he should be in the ascendant opposed to either of 
“‘ the luminaries” (si én horosedpo alteri luminum opponatur); but the 
Latin copy of Basle, 1541, as well as that of Perugio, 1646, give the 
passage as now rendered. And it appears in a subsequent place, 
Pp. 201 (where the word as9ugoorxera occurs), that it can only be properly 
translated “ in opposition to the ascendant.” 

¢ Caput Medusz. 


Chap. IX.] PTOLEMY’S TETEABIBLOS, 201 


decapitation, or by mutilation of limb. If found in Scorpio or 
Taurus, he will cause death by surgical amputation, burning 
or searing, or also by spasms or convulsions. Should he 
be found in the mid-heaven, either above or below the 
earth, death will be inflicted by crucifixion or impalement, 
and especially if he be in the vicinity of Cepheus or Andro- 
meda. If descending, or in opposition to the ascendant*, 
he will produce death by fire: and, if in quadrupedal signs, 
by falls and fractures. Should Jupiter, however, bear tes- 
timony to Mars, and be at the same time afflicted, death will 
ensue from the wrath of princes and kings, and from judi- 
cial condemnation. 

If it happen that the malefics be in concurrence with 
each other.in the first instance, and afterwards in mutual 
opposition, in any of the aforesaid situations, the evil cha- 
racter of the death will be yet further augmented; but its 
species or quality, and its dominion, will depend upon that 
one which may be in occupation of the aneretic place. And, 
if both the malefics claim prerogative in the anzretic places, 
the bodies of persons who thus die will be cast abroad with- 
out interment, and will be devoured by beasts and birds: 
these circumstances will especially ensue, when the malefics 
may be found in signs similar in form to beasts and birds ; 
and provided not any one of the benefics should offer testi- 
mony to the place below the earthf, nor to the anseretic 
places. 

Lastly, death will occur in ‘foreign lands, when it may 
happen that the planets controuling the anseretic places 
may be posited in cadent houses ; especially if the Moon be 





© ArOugeonezur, Vide. note * in p- 200. 
+ That is to say, the lower heaven, or imum-coeli.—W halley has 


translated it, ‘“‘ above the earth,” instead of “ below ;” mistaking uve 
for veg. 
nd 


-202 PTOLEMY’S TRETRABIBLOS. | { Book TV. 


_ present in the said places also, or if she be found in quartile 
_Or in opposition*. 


Chapter X. 
The periodital Divisions of Time. 
In addition to the foregoing brief observations, applicable to 
the various forms of death, further attention is demanded 
with respect to the division of time, which requires to be 
contemplated in its natural order and succession. 

Now as, in all genethlialogical cases, a certain common and 
general arrangement, affecting the region or country, and 
the race or generation, is pre-supposed to be in operation, to 
which arrangement particular inferences, relating to the 
form of the body, the properties of the mind, and national 
habits and variations, must each be subservient ; and as, in 


e 
* 





* On this chapter Whalley makes the following annotations: ‘One 
“ direction, how malevolent soever, rarely kills ; and, in most nativi- 
“‘ ties, there is required a train of malevolent directions to concur 


“to death: where several malevolent directions concur so together 


“ without the aid or intervenings of the benevolents, they fail not to 
“* destroy life. 

“In sach trains of directions, the author here distinguisheth be- 
‘ tween the ‘killing planet and the canser ofthe quality of death ; 
“‘ for one planet doth not give both.. The foremost of the malevolent 
“ train is the kiing place, and shews the time of death ; but the 
“‘ following directions, though benevolent, shew the quality. If the 
“ train fall all together, and none follow, for the quality observe those 
‘“‘which precede, though at a distance and benevolent also; for, 
“though the benevolent contribute to the preservation of life, -yet 
** they frequently specify the disease which is the cause of death. 
‘“ And with these, our author tells us, concur the configurating stars, 
“the quality of the stars and signs, and the terms in which the lords 
“happen. In violent deaths, the genethliacal positions of the lights 
“are to be observed, and how the malefics affect them, and [how: 
“ they] are also concerned by directions ia the quality: of imal 

Bee also Chap. 14, Book 3. : 


Chap. X.] PYOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 203 


these respects, certain causes more general and predominat- 

Ing are pre-supposed in existence before particular causes, 

due care must consequently be taken, in order to make an 

inference consistent with the course of nature, to observe 

always the original and predominating cause, and never to 

lose sight of it; lest some similarity in nativities (if any such 

should exist) might induce an assertion, when the original 

predominating cause proceeding from the region itself has 

been overlooked, that the native of Ethiopia will be born 

of white complexion, and with long and straight hair ; or, 

on the other hand, that the native of Germany or of Gaul 
will be black in complexion, and have curled hair ; or, that 

the said nations are polished in manners, and cultivate learn- 

ing, but that the people of Greece are barbarous and illite- 

rate : and so, in short, of any other countries ;—without duly 

considering the nafional differences and variations in their 
several courses of life.—So also, with regard to the division 

of time, it.is in the same manner essential to consider the 
different qualities of the several ages of life, and to pre- 

determine the appropriate fitness of every age to such events 
as may be expected ; in order to avoid the gross error which 
might arise from a merely vague consideration of the sub- 

ject, by attributing to infancy some deed or circumstance of 
too complete a nature and belonging rather to manhood, or 
by ascribing to extreme old age the procreation of children, 

or some other action belonging to youth; and to adapt, on 

the contrary, to each separate age such circumstances as 

seem, by due observation of the periods, to be suitable and 

appropriate thereto. | 

. The mode of consideration* applicable to human nature, 

Is universally one and the same ; and it is analogous to the 

arrangement.of the -seven planetary orbst. It, therefore, 





© With respect to the periodical divisions of time. 
t It will, of course, be remembered, that the Sun, in the Ptolemaic 
astronomy, is counted as a planetary orb. - 


Ss Ne ety $20 -. ty! er ee renee ar Bs =—— * ord 
7 ee 2 rf 


204 | PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. { Book IV. 


duly commences with the first age of human life, and the 
first sphere next above the earth, that of the Moon; and it 
terminates with the final age of man, and the last of the 
planetary spheres, which is that of Saturn; and, in fact, it 
accordingly happens that the appropriate qualities of each 
sphere take effect in a corresponding age of life, each age 
being subjected to one particular sphere. These observa- 
tions are necessary, because the general divisions of time _ 
must be considered by means of the spheres, as a primary 


arrangement; although minor distinctions are to be made 


by means of the existing peculiarities found in nativities. 
Hence, the first age of infancy, which endures for four 
years, agreeing in number with the quadrennial period of the 
Moon, is consequently adapted to her; being in its nature 
moist and incompact, presenting rapidity of growth, being 
nourished by moist things, and possessing a highly variable 
habit. Its mental incompleteness is likewise in accordance 
with its familiar relation to the Moon, and her operative 
influence. 
The age after this continues for ten years,.and accommo- 
dates itself to the second sphere, that of Mereury. In $his 


period, the intellectual and reasoning faculties of the mizid 


begin to take their character, imbibing the seeds of learning, 
and developing, as it were, the elements and germs-of the 
genius and abilities, and their peculiar quality. The miad 
is also-aroused to discipline and instruction, and to its ant 
exercises. 

Venus corresponds with the next and third age, which 
lasts throughout the following eight years, the number of 
her own period: from her, the movement of the seminal 
vessels originates, as well as an unrestrained impetuosity and 
precipitancy in amours, 

The fourth and adult age next ‘succeeds, and is sub- 
ject to the fourth sphere, that of the Sun: it endures for 
nineteen years, according to the Sun’s number. Authority 


A 


Chap. .X.] PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. 205 


of action now commences in the mind, the career of life is 
entered upon, distinction and glory are desited, and puerile 
irregularities are relinquished for more orderly conduct, and 
the pursuit of honour. 

Mars, next after the Sun, claims the fifth age, that of 
manhood, agreeing in duration with -his own period, viz.: 
fifteen years. He induces greater austenty of life, together 
with vexation, care, and trouble. 

Jupiter oceupies the sixth sphere, and influences the ma- ° 
turer age, during the twelve years corresponding to his own 
period. He operates the relinquishment of labour, of ha- 
zatdous employment and tumult, and produces greater gra- 
vity, foresight, prudence, and sagacity, favouring the oo 
to honour, respect, and privilege. 

Saturn, moving in the last sphere, regulates the final old 
age, as agreeing with its chillness. He obstructs the mental 
movements, the appetites and enjoyments $ rendering them 
imbecile and dull, in conformity with the dullness of his 
own motion. 

The common properties attributable to the various times — 
of life are subject, in a general manner, to this previous 
adaptations but there are particular periods, arising from - 
the respective peculiarities of nativities, which also require 
determination, and must be ascertained frem the ruling pro- 
rogations ; that is to say, from the whole of them, and not 
from any single one only, as in the case of the duration of 
life. For example, prorogation made from the ascendant 
is to be applied to events affecting the body, and to travel- 
ling, or change of residences that from the part of Fortune, 
to incidents affecting the sabstance or wealth; that from 
the Moon, to affections of the mind, and to communion* 
and cohabitation; that from the Sun, to dignities and 
glory ; and that from the mid-heaven, to other partiontar 





* The Latin copy of Basle, 1541, says, “ to marriages.” 


~~e= 
- —_——_— —- ———- ae eee OS — 


206 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IV. 


circumstances of life, such as employment, friendship, and 
the possession of children. So that thus, at one and the | 
same time, any single planet, whether benefic or malefic, 
will not possess the sole dominion; for many conflicting 
events frequently occur at the same period, and a person 
may, at one and the same time, lose a kinsman, yet inherit 
his substance ; or be at once ill in health, yet prosperous 
and advantageously established in regard to fortune; or be 
struggling with adversity arid in want, yet, notwithstanding, 
be also a father and beget children ; or he may experience 
other similar contrarieties : because individuals are subject to 
occurrences which may affect either the body, the mind, the 
rank, or the condition of wealth, and which are not altogether 
fortunate or unfortunate at the same period. Something of 
the kind will, however, frequently happen in cases of perfect 

good fortune-or distress, when meetings of all the bene- 
fics or malefics may concur in all or most of the proroga- 
tions. Still such cases are but rare, because human. nature 
in general is not subjected to the extremity either of good 
or evil, but rather to their moderate alternation and counter- 
change. | , 5 & 

The prorogatory places must, therefore, be separately dis- 
tinguished in the mode ‘before ‘pointed out; and the planets 
meeting the prorogations must again be all taken into con- 
sideration : not only those which may be anezretic (asin the 
case of the duration of life), nor those only which may be 
configurated bodily*, or-in opposition or quartile, but also 
those in trine or sextile. And, first, the times in each pro- 
rogation will be governed by the planet occupying or con- 
figurated with the actual prorogatory degree itself: if, how- 
ever, there be found no planet thus constituted, the nearest 
preceding planet will. govern the times until another, which 
may be in aspect to the degree following in the order of the 
signs, shall take them; and this one, again, will do the same 





. * “ Bodily,” or in conjunction. ..: 


Chap. X.] PTOLEMY’S TRTRABIBLOS. - 207 


until the next in succession shall take them*. The like rule 
obtains with respect to any other planets received into domi-— 
nion, and with respect to those in occupation of the terms. 

-Further, in: prorogations of the ascendant, the degrees -of’ 
distances will be equal in number to the ascensional times of 
the particular latitude ; but, in prorogation from the mid- 
heaven, to the times of culmination; and, in other proro- 
gations, they will be in proportion to the ascensions, or de- 
scensions, or culminations, and will depend on their proxi- 
mity to the angles; as has been sae said in treating of 
the duration of lifet. 

The arbiters of general times are to be determined by the 
foregoing method; but arbiters of annual periods as fol- 
lows: viz. after the number of years which have elapsed 
Since the birth has been ascertained, the amount is to be 
Projected from each place of prorogation, in the succession 
of the signs, at the rate of one sign fora yeart, and the 





* On this passage, Whalley remarks, “we are to observe in direc- 
‘tion, that the star in exact ray with the prorogator shall be ruler 
‘‘ until the prorogator méets another ray ; that then the planet whose 
“ray it is shall take the dominion, and so on. But if no planet 
“ aspect the byleg (proregator) exactly, that which casts its rays before 
“ the prorogator is to be taken for ruler of the_time, till another pla- 
‘ net’s ray comes in by direction. And the jord of the term, in which 
“ the direction falls, must be considered as a co-partner in this do- 
‘“ minion.” 

+ Vide Chap. 14, Book 3. 

¢ The Greek is simply sic va ero.sva nate Yedior; but the context 
proves that the entire meaning must be as now given, although the 
Latin translation of Perugio renders it “ one year to each degree.” 
Whalley explains that by-annual periods “the author intends profec- - 
“tions: for the taking of which, for every year from the birth, add.one 
“‘ sign to the sign in which the aphetics are at birth, and the sign which 
“ ends at the year desired is the sign profectional for that year, and the 


“ lord of that sign is chronocrator (arbiter) for that year; sofar as | 


“the degrees of that sign reach, For example, if a prorogator at 


208 PLOLEMY’S TETBASIBLOS. [Book IV. 


lord of the last sign* is to be assumed as arbiter. And, 
with regard to periods reckoned by months, the same rule {s 
to be observed: for in this case also, the number of the 
. month, as counted from the month of the nativity, is to be 
projected from such places as possess the dominion of the 
year, in the proportion of twenty-eight days per sign. So, 
likewise, in the case of periods reckoned by days, the num- 
ber of the days counted from the day of birth, must be pro- 
jected from the monthly places of dominion, allowing for 
each sign two days and a third. 

It is, however, necessary to notice the ingresses made on = 
places allotted to different periods; for they take effect in 
no small degree on the events of the period. Thus, the 
ingresses made by Satum, on places of general periods, 
require special observation; those made by Jupiter, on 
places of annual periods ; those made by the Sun, Mars, 
Venus, and Mercury, on monthly.places ; and the Moon’s 
_ transit over daily places. It must also be remembered, that 
arbiters of general periods are chiefly paramount over the 
“events; and that, to their influence, the arbiters of particu- 
Jar periods (each of whom acts by its own proper nature) 





’ “ birth be in 15° of Gemini, to 15° of Cancer serves the first year; 
‘“‘ but the first six months are ruled by Mercury, and the last six by 
“‘ the Moon and Jupiter; and so on.” 

* The Latin translation of Basle, 1541, says, “the lord of that sign 
- “in which the number shall terminate.” 

+t Whalley says here, “ let a sign be added-for each month to the 
sign of the year. So, in the example before proposed, the last 15° 
‘of Gemini, and the firat 15° of Cancer, shall serve for the first 
“month: the last 15° ef Cancer and the first 15° of Leo, for the 
‘“‘ second month; and soon. And for days, from 15° of Gemini to 
‘15° of Cancer, rules two days and eight hours after birth, &c.” 

Piacidus is of opinion, “thet Ptolemy, speaking of annual places, 
“ is to he understood of the places of secondary directions ; and that 
“‘ when he speaks of the menstrual, he hints at the places of: progres: 
' “sions.” (Cooper’s Translation, pp. 25 and 57.) . 


Chap. X.} PTOLEMY'S TETRABIBEOS, 209 


present either co-operation or obstruction; and that the 
ingresses alsa operate on.eyents, by increasing or diminish- 
ing their force and extent*. 

. The general characteristic property, and the duration of 
the period, will be indicated by the place of prorogation, as 
alag by the Jord of the general times, and by the planet in 
possession of the termsas by. means of the familiarity gub- 
sisting, fram the actual birth, between each planet, and the 
places of which they may have respectively and originally 
taken dominion. The arbiters of time will also give-indica- 
tion whether the event will be good or evil, by means of 
their own naturally benefic or malefic property and tempera- 
_ ment, and by: their osiginal familiarity or variance with the 
place af which they have become lords. But the period, at 
which the event will become more strongly evident, is shewn 
by the relative positions of the annual and monthly signs 
towards the places wherein the causes exist, and also by the 
ingresses of the planets¢. 





* Placidys says, that “ active ingresses, if they ba similar to the 
“ pre-ordained effects, cayse them to influence ; if dissimilar, they 
“ either diminish or retard; as Ptolemy has it in the last Chapter of 
“ Book 4.” (Caoper’s Pranslation, p. 27.) 

+ Placidus observes, that “the primary directions of the significa- 
“ tors to their promittors, and the lords of the terms, Ptolemy calls 
‘“‘ the General Arbiters of Times, because they pre-ordain the general ~ 
“times of theis effects; whieh, a8 ita motian is slaw and its perse- 
“ verance long, discovers ite effects after a very long time ; that i, 
“after months and yeass. Jn order that we may know, in this 
“ extent of time, on what particular month aad day the effects ap- 
* pear, Ptolomy proposes these motions for observation, wherein, 
“‘ whew the majority of (he causes agree together, then doubtless the 
 effent is accomplished, or meat clearly manifests itself.” (Cooper's 
Tranaetion, p. 109.) And he says afterwards, ip speaking of secon- 
dary directions, progressions, ingtesscs, &e. “ these subgequent mo- 
‘“‘4ions of the causes demand our greatest attention.” (Ibid. p. 110.) 
In the Appendix to the same-book, at p. 488, the proper equation of 

EE : 


\ . 


210 PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS. [Book IV. 


'The mode in which the Sun.and Moon may be disposed, 
in reference to the signs relating to annual and monthly 
periods, is also indicative. For example, should they, from 
the date of the nativity, be posited in concord with the ope- 
rative places, and keep a position of concord at the ingresses, 
they will: produce good ; but, if adversely posited, evil. And 
also, if they be not in concord with the said places, and 
provided they be contrary in condition, and in opposition or 
in quartile, to the transits, they will cause evil: should they, 
however, not be in quartile, nor in opposition, but other- 
wise configurated, their influence then will not be equally 
malefic. = | 
’ Should it happen that the same planets may be lords of the 
times*, as well as of the ingresses, the effect will be extreme 
and unalloyed, if of a favourable nature ; and more particu- 
larly unmitigated, if evil. And should the said planets be 
not only lords of the times, but. likewise hold dominion 
from the date of the nativity, and provided also that all the 
prorogations, or most of them, should tend to, or depend 
on, one and the same place, or, should the prorogations not 
be so constituted, yet notwithstanding, if the meetings oc- 
curring at the periods be found to be either all, or most of 
them, benefic or malefic, they will wholly produce, in all 
respects, good or evil fartune, respectively. 





time, or méasurement of the arcs of direction, is also treated of, in 
reference to the 16th canon of Placidus, which is as follows :— 

“ To equate the Arc of Direction. Add the arc of direction to the 
“ right ascension of the natal Sun; look for this sum in the table of 
“‘ right ascensions under the ecliptic, and take the degree and minute 
“ of longitude corresponding with that sum; then, in the best ephe- 
“‘ meris, reckon in how many days and hours the Sun, from the day 
* and hour of birth, has arrived at that-degree and minute. The num- 
“ber of days indicate as many years; every two hours over, reckon 
“amonth.” (Ibid. p. 55.) 
® Whether general or annual. 


Chap. X.] . PTOLEMY’S TETRABIBLOS., _ 211 


It is in this method, which preserves a natural order 
and succession, that times and seasons require to be con- 
templated. 


Gunna ssp 


And now, in adverting to the scope allotted to this work 
in its commencement, all further adaptation of the forms of 
events liable to take effect at particular times will here be 
relinquished ; because the operative influences which the 
stars exercise in all events, whether general or particular, 
may be arranged in proper order, if care be taken that the 
causes set forth by the Rules of Science, and the causes 
arising from any existing commixture, be duly combined and 
blended together. 


THE END. 


thi an! Ger ~ asm ee. are eh = oon henge ues ec ad 


APPRNDIN. 
No. it, 


Atvacest ; Boox VIII, Cuar. LV. 


THE vattous constellations of the fited stats having now - 
beens duly described, theit aspects remain to be investl- 
gated. 

independently of the stedfast and ‘amitatte aspects which 
the said stars preserve among themselves, either rectilinearly, | 
or triangularly, or by other similar forms*, they have also 
_ certain aspects considered as referring exclusively to the pla- 
nets and the Sun and Moon, or parts of the zodiac ; certain’ 
others to the earth only ; and others, again, to the earth, 
the planets and the Sun and Moon, or parts of the zodiac, 
combined. 

With regard to the planets only, and parts of the zodiac, . 
aspects are properly considered as made to them by the fixed 
stars, when the said planets and fixed stars may be posited 
on one and the same of those circles which are drawn 
. through the poles of the zodiac ; or, also, if they be posited 
on different circles, provided a trinal or sextile distance be-- 


tween them may be preserved ; that. is to say, a distance © | 


equal te.a right angle and a third part more, or a distance 
equal to two thirds of a right angle; and provided,’ also, 
that the fixed stars be on such parts of the -circle as are liable 
to be transited by any orie of the planets. These parts are 





* That is to say, by the opposition, trine, &c. 


APPENDIX. 213 


situated within the latitude of the soiliac, which circumscribes 
the planetary motions. And as far as the five planets are 
concerned, the aspects of the fixed stars depend upon the 
visible mutual conjunctions, or configurations, made in the - 
forms above prescribed 5 but, with respect to the Sun and 
Moon, they depend on occultations, conjunctions, and suc- 
_ cedent risings of the stars. Occultation is when a star 
becomes invisible by being carried under the rays of the 
lucninary 3 conjunction, when it is placed under the lumi-+ 
nary’s ceitre; and succedent fising, when it dam to ree 
appear on issuing out beyond the rays. 

In regard to the earth only, the aspects of the fixed stars 
are four ta number, and are known by the common term of 
angles; to speak, however, more particularly; they are the 
oriental horizon, the meridian of mid-heaven above the 
¢arth, the occidental horizon, and the. meridian or mid+- 
“heaven below the earth. And in that part of the earth where 
" the equator is in the zenith, the whole of the fixed stars 


'” ‘are found to rise and set, and to be aboye as well as below the 


_ earthy‘once in each revolutions because the situation of the 
. poles f ‘the equator, being in this manner on the plane of the 


~~ horizon, thereby preverits the constant visibility or invisibility 


‘of any one of thé parallel circles, But in other parts of the 
‘ earth, where the pole of the equator is in the zenith, the 
"fixed stars ‘cah never set nor rise 3 because the equator itself 
. is.¢hen on the plane of the horizon, and. circumscribes the 
| two hemispheres (which it thus creates, one above and the 
 ethet below the earth) in such a manner, thzt in one revolu- 
_féon every star tust twice traziait: the meridian, some of | 
them above, others below the earth, In other declinations, 


 fhowever, béetween these extreme positions of the equator, as 


. just mendtioued, there are certain of ilve circles always visible, 


= and othets never visible ; ‘consequently, the stars intercepted _ 


between the first of sisch nce and :the poles can neither rise 
nor set, but saust, in the course of one revolution,’ twice 


214 APPENDIX. 


transit the meridian ; above the earth, if the said stars be on 
a circle always visible ; but below the earth, if on a circle 
never visible. The other stars, however, situated on the 
greater parallels, both rise and set, and are found in each 
revolution once on the meridian above the earth, and once 
on that below the earth.—lIn all these cases, the time occn- 
pied in proceeding round from any one angle to the same 
again, must be everywhere equal in its duration, for it is 
marked by one sensible revolution; and the time occupied 
in passing from either meridianal angle to the angle diame- 
trically opposite, is also everywhere equal ; because it is 
marked by the half of one revolution. So, also, the pas- 
sage from either horizontal angle to its opposite angle is 
again effected in the same equal portion of time, wherever 
the equator may be in the zenith, for it is then likewise 
marked by the half of an entire revolution ; because on such 


.a position of the equator, all the parallels are then divided, 


as well by the horizon as by the meridian, into two equal 
parts. But in all other declinations, the time of passage of 
a semicircle above the earth is not equal to that of its pas- 
sage below the earth, except only in the case of the equi- 
noctial circle itself, which, in an oblique sphere, is the only 
one divided by the horizon into two equal parts, all others 
(its parallels) being bisected into dissimilar and unequal arcs. 
It follows, accordingly, that the time contained in the space 
between rising or setting, and either meridian, must be equal 
to the time between the same meridian and rising or setting; 
because the meridian divides equally such portions of the 
parallels as are above or under the earth. But in proceeding 
in an oblique sphere, from rising or setting to either meri- 
dian, the time occupied must be unequal ; and in a right 
sphere, equal, because the entire portions above the earth 
are, in a right sphere only, equal to those below the earth ; 
whence, for instance, in a right sphere, whatever stars may . 
be together on the meridian must also all rise and set ‘to- 


APPENDIX. , 215 


i 


gether, until their progress becomes perceptible by the poles 
of the zodiac; while, on the other hand, in an oblique 
sphere, whatever stars may be together on the meridian can 
neither all rise together nor set together; for the more 
southern stars must always rise later than those which are 
more northern, and set earlier*. 

- The aspects. made by the fixed stars, in regard to the pla- 
nets or parts of -the zodiac, and the earth combined, are, 
considered, in a general manner, by the rising, or meridianal 

_ position, or setting of the said fixed stars in conjunction 
with any planet or part of the zodiac ; but their aspects are 
properly distinguishable, by means of the Sun, in the nine 
following modes :— 

1.. The first is called matutine subsolar, when the star is 
found together with the Sun in the oriental horizon. Of 
this aspect, one species is called the oriental, invisible, and 
succedent rising ; when the star, at the commencement of 
its occultation, rises immediately after the Sun: another is 
called the precise oriental co-rising ; when the star is found 
in partile conjunction with the Sun in the oriental horizon : 
another is the oriental, precedent, and visible rising; when 
the star, beginning to appear, rises before the Sun. 

_ 2. The second aspect is termed matutine location in the 
mid-heaven ; when the star is found on the meridian, either 
€ above or. below the earth, while the Sun is on the oriental 
horizon. And of this:aspect, one species is called a succe- 
dent and oriental: location in the mid-heaven, invisible; 

. when, immediately after the Sun’s rising, the star shall be 
found on the meridian : another is the precise oriental loca- 

tion in the mid-heaven ; when, exactly as the Sun rises, the 
star is at the same time on the meridian; another is the ori- _ 
ental precedent location in the mid-heaven ; when the star. 
first shall come to the meridian above the earth, and the 
Sun may then immediately rise. | 


* On this side of the equator. 


216 APPENDIX. 


3. The third, called matutine setting, ia when the Sun 
may be actually ia the oriental horizon, but the star in the 
-eecidental. One of the forms of this aspeet is talled the 
_ oriental, suecedent setting, invisible; when the star sets 
immediately after the Sun’s rising: another is the precise 
oriental co-setting, when the star sets at the moment of the 
‘Sun’s rising: epother is the oriental, precedent, and visible 
setting, when the Sun dogs not rise until immediately after 
the setting of the star. 

4. The fourth aspect is named meridianal subsalar, and 
takes place when the Sun is actually op the meridian, but 


the ster on the oriental horizon. Of this, one is diurnal and: 


invisible ; when the star rises while the Sun is posited on 
the meridian -aboye the earth; another is nocturnal and vi- 
sible ; when the star rises while the Sun is placed on was 
meridian below the earth. 


5, The fifth is called meridianal location in the mid- — 


heayen ; when the Sun, as well as the star, may be at the 
game time on the meridian. Of this aspect, two sorts are 
diarnal and invisible; when the star is on the meridjan 


ahowe the earth, together with the Sun, or on that below the 


. - earth, diametrically opposite to the Sun. Two also are noc- 


tuma], and of these, one 3s invisibles when the star is on 
the meridian under the earth, together with the Sunt the 
‘other, however, is visible; when ths star is on-the meridian 
above the earth, diametrically opposite to the Gun. 

6. The-sjxth is meridianal setting 5 when the star is found 
en the accidental bomzon, while the Sun is on the meridian. 
Of cubis, one species is diurnal and invisible ; when the star 
sets while the Hun is above the earth on the meridian: the 
other is nocturnal and visible; when the star sets while the 
Sua is on the meridian below the earth. 

7. The seventh aspect is called vespertine subsolars whea 
the star is found on the oriental horizon, while the Sun is 
posited on the occjdental horizon, One form of this aspect 


- \ 


APPENDIX. 217 


is the vespertine succedent rising, visible ; when the star rises 
immediately after sunset: another is the precise vespertine 
_ co-rising ; when the star rises and the Sun sets at one and 
‘the same time: another is the precedent, vespertine rising, 
invisible ; when the star rises immediately before the Sun 
“sets, - 

8. The eighth is _—e vespertine location in the mid- 
heaven; when the star is on the meridian, either above or 
below the earth, while the Sun is placed on the occidental 
horizon. Of this aspect, one kind is called a visible vesper- 
tine location in the mid-heaven; when the star is found 
there immediately after sunset: another is the precise ves- 
pertine location in the mid-heaven; when the star is found 
there at the moment of sunset : aaoiher is the vespertine 
precedent location in the mid-heaven, invisible ; when the 
Star arrives there inamediately before sunset. 

9. The ninth aspect is called vespertine setting ; when the 
star, together with the Sun, is on the occidental horizon. One 
form of this aspect is the vespertine, succedent and visible 
setting ; when the star, at the commencement of its occul- 
tation, sets immediately after the Sun: another is the pre- 
cise vespertine setting ; when the star sets at the same mo- 
ment with the Sun: another is the precedent, invisible set- 
ting; when the star, before it emerges from its occultation, 
sets before the Sun. 


SY a a 


No, 2 


ALMAGEST; Book II. Exrract From Cuap. IX. 
Of Circumstances regulated by Ascensions. 


—IN any climate whatever, the magnitude of a given day or 

night is to be computed by the number of ascensional times 

proper to that particular climate. For example, the mag- 
FF 


218 APPENDIX.. 


nitude of the day will be ascertained by numbering the times 
between the Sun’s zodiacal degree and the degrce diametri- 
‘cally opposite, in the succession of the signs; and that of 
the night, by numbering the times, from the: degree diame- 
trically opposite to the Sun, onwards, in the order of the 
signs, to the degree actually occupied by the Sun: because, 
by dividing the respective amounts of these times so obtain- 
ed, by fifteen, the number of equatorial hours. belonging - to 
each space will be exhibited ;, and if the division be made 
by twelve, instead of fifteen, the result will shew the num- - 
bers of degrees equivalent to one temporal hour of either 
of the said spaces respectively*. 
‘The magnitude of any temporal hour may be, however, 
more easily found by referring to the annexed Table of As-' 
censions, and taking the difference between the respective 
aggregate numbers, inserted therein under the heads of the 
equinoctial parallel or right sphere, and: of any. particular 
climate for which the magnitude of the temporal hour is 
required ; and, if the said hour be a diurnal hour, the ag-- 
gregate times as stated against the zodiacal degree occupied 
by the Sun; but, if nocturnal, those stated against the de- 
gree diametrically opposite, are to be compared; and the 
sixth part of the difference between them is to be added, if 
rn 
* Thus (according to the Table inscrted at p. 223), in the climate 
or latitude of Lower Egypt, the times of ascension between the first 
point of Gemini and the first point of Sagittarius, diametrically oppo- 
site, are 205° 18’, which, being divided by 15, give 13 hours 41'mi- 
nutes and a fraction of equatoriat‘time, as the length of:the day of 
the first point of Gemini. And the same number of times of aseen- 
sion, divided by 12, give 17° 6’ and a fraction of the equator, as the 
length of the diurnal temporal hour. ‘In the latitude of Southern 
Britain, the times of ascension between the same points as above- 
mentioned are 236° 2’, which, divided by 15, give 15 hours 44 mi- 
nutes and a fraction of equatorial time as the length of the day of the 
first point of Gemini; and, if divided by 12, they produce 19° 40’ and 
a fraction of the cquator, as the length of the diurnal femporal hour. 


. APPENDIX. 219 


the said degtee be in the northern signs, to the fifteen times 
of an equatorial hour; but subtracted therefrom, if in the 
southern signs. The amountthus obtained will be the re- 
quired number of degrees of the temporal hour in question*. 
And if it-be required to reduce the temporal hours of any 
-given day or night, in a certain climate, into equatorial 
‘hours, they must be multiplied by their proper horary times, 
whether diurnal or nocturnal, as the case may be; the pro- 
.duct is then to be divided by fifteen, and the quotient will 
necessarily be the number of equatorial hours in the climate - 
in question, on the given day or nightt. On the other 





* Thus, the aggregate times of ascension, in a right sphere, of the 
first point of Gemini are 57° 44’; and, in the climate of Lower Z:gypt, 
45° 5’: the sixth part of the difference between them is 2° 6' and a 
fraction, which, added.to 15°, again makes the diurnal temporal hour 
of the first point of Gemini equal to 17° 6’ and a fraction of the equa- 
tor. In the climate of Southern Britain, the aggregate times of as- 
cension of the first point of Gemini are 29° 43’: the sixth part of the 
difference between that sum and 57° 44’ of right ascension is 4° 40 
and a fraction, which, added to 15°, makes the diurnal temporal hour 
of the first point of Gemini, in South Britain, equal to 19° 40’ and a 
fraction of the equator, as before shewn. 


+t For example, \ 
Diurnal horary times of the first point of Gemini, in the 
latitude of Alexandria - = © «= «= 17°. & $0" 


Number of temporal hours - s= -2© + © 12 
| | 15)205 18 0 





Diurnal equatorial hours of the first point of Gemini in 








the latitude of Alexandria - - - - - 13 41°18: 
ame sae 
Diurnal horary times of the first point of Gemini in the ae 
‘latitude of Southern Britain... - = - - = 19° 40’ 10” 
Number of temporal hours ee >: Bi 22, 
! 15)236 2 0| 





Diurnal equatorial hours of the first point of Gemini in 
the latitude of Southern Britain - - - - 15 44 8 








> 


220 APPENDIX, 

hand, equatorial hours are also to be reduced inito temporal 
hours by being multiplied by fifteen, the product of which 
is to be divided by the horary times proper to the given a 
or night in the said climate. | 

_ The degree ascending in the ecliptic, at any given tem- 
‘poral hour, may also be ascertained by multiplying the num- 
ber of temporal hours since sunrise, if the given hour be 
diurnal, but if nocturnal, since sunset, by their proper ho- 
rary times ; and the product is to be added, in the succes- 
ston of the signs, to the aggregate number (as shewn by the 
ascensions proper to the climate) of the Sun’s degree, if the 
given hour he diurnal, but, if nocturnal, to that of the de- 
gree diametrically opposite, and that particular degree of the 
ecliptic which “shall correspond with the total number thus 
found in the ascensions of the climate will be the degree 
then ascending®. 

But, in order to ascertain the degree on sane meridian above 
the earth, the number of temporal hours since the preceding 
noon are also to be multiplied by their proper horary times, 
and the product is to be added to the aggregate number of 
the Sun’s right ascension; and that degree of the ecliptic, 
with which the. total number as found in the aggregate times 
of right ascension shall carrespond, wl then be on the me- 
ndjiant. The degree on the oriental horizon will, however, 





* Let the first point of Gemini be on the meridian above the earth ; 
the number of temporal hours since sunrise will then be 6, by which 
- 17° 6’ 30” are to be multiplied. ‘The product will be 102239’: this, 
added to 45° 5’, the aggregate number of the first point of Gemini in 
the latitude of Alexandria, will give 147° 44’, which, in the ascen- 
sions of the eHimate in question, will correspond to the Sd degree of 
Vifgo, and shew that to be the degree ascending. In the latitude of 
_ Southern Britain the total number would still amount to the same ; 
viz. 147° 44’, but it would shew 7° and about 30’ of Virgo to be as- 
cending. ; 

t Let the first point of Gemini be three temporal hours past the | 
meridian: these hours reduced to degrees, in the latitude of Alcx- 


- 


Pe. te 


APPENDIX. 221 


also shew what degree occupies the meridian; for, by sub- 
tracting 90 times (the amount of the quadrant) from the 
aggregate number ascribed to the said ascending degree in 
the Table proper to the-climate, the number so reduced will 
be found, in the aggregate times of the Table of Right As- 
cension, to correspond with the degree on the meridian. And 
again, on the other hand, by adding 90 to the aggregate 
times ascribed by right ascension to the degree on the me 
ridian above the earth, the degree ascending may be obtain- 


| _ ed, for it will be that degree which corresponds to that total 


number, as stated in the Table proper to the climate*. 

The Sun always preserves an equal distance in equatorial 
hours from all parts of the same meridian ; but his distance 
in equatorial hours from different meridians varies according 


‘to the degrees of distance between meridian and meridian. 





andria, will give 51° 19, which, added to the right ascension of the 
first point of Gemini, make 109° 3', shewing the 18th degree of Can- 
cer on the meridian. In the latitude of Southern Britain, these hours 
would produce 59°, which, added to the right ascension, would make 
116° 44’, and shew the 25th degree of Cancer on the meridian. 

* Thus, in the latitude of Alexagdria, when the first point of Ge- 
mini is three temporal howrs past the meridian, the “16th degree of 
Libra will be on the ascendant, and the aggregate times of ascension 
of that, degree in the said latitude are 199° 3’: by subtracting 90 from 
this sum, the remainder will be 109° 3’, the right ascensi-y of the 
mid-heaven answering to the 18th degree of Cancer. the latitude 
of Southern Britain, the 18th degree of Libra would be on the as- 
cendant, of which degree the aggregate times of ascension in that 
latitude are 206° 44’, from which, if 90 be subtracted, the remainder 
will be 116° 44’, the right ascension of the mid-heaven answering to 
the 25th degree of Cancer.—The converse of these operations seems 
too obvious to need explanation. 


e 


222 _APPENDIX. 


TABLE OF LATITUDES, AS SHEWN BY THE DURATION 
OF THE LONGEST DAY. 3 


[From the Almagest.] 








LATITUDE. ||LONGEST ar LATITUDE. 








M. 
0 Oj 16 50 





4 15 |} 16 


46 51\| 2% oO] 66 10 


48 32 





* Alexandria. + Southern Britain. 


APPENDIX. 223 


Extract from the Table of Ascensions (contained in the 
Almagest ), calculated for every tenth Degree of the Zodiac. 





ath Chmatz, 

Ina Right hern 

ty Sphere under pk eaten 
the Equator, Lat 51° 30’ N 
Diurnal Arc Diurnat Are 
SIGNS = 12 Hours. . p16 He. 30 Mts 
5 Times | dgere- | Times) Aggre+ Limes) Augre 

r gate 



















D, MM. D. M, D. MM. D. MM.) DD. M, DD. M, 
JAries..... pee a /1O 9,10} 9.10] 6.48 6.48 4. 5) 4, 5 





——_| =>. I SS | OS | 
19.8 
——— a 


| J | 


Cancer,. ‘é hath a ] 0.55 100.55 11.15 ra 6.13 née 36 BFBi 


Tir.) Gal ne ali 


0 ee 


ring Leds ecg fatal en 


et ls et, 


a01 SRC TE GITIRE tasalI37- 
Virgo. seeeces j 9-25] 161.95 11.40 0/156.5: if 4. 19)151,27 aA 


Jal 9.40|180. « f.3e liso, ola, TH TBII60. 0 
-10| 189. 10}1 1.92) 191, 3914. 15)194,15 
aa 11,38 203. 7]14.18/208.33 


LAOS oc aaiaas 


SCOMplO . oe eae! 


SS 


Sagittarius .... 


; 0/10.55|270. 0 11.1242 285. C OT 1.36 303.45 
Capricornus,.. Mp .56 10.56 55 280.5! 280.65 10.98 10.98); aS, 10.14/313,55 





oot “4 30110-341302 76 “o.17/5 14, 55 “7,99|330.17 
‘{Aquarius,..... 10}10, [o|942.59) 8.37/323.32 6.2! oe 


— 341.55) 7.10|946.1° aI. 


Pisces. .... +, {10 . 
30) 9.15)/550..5¢ A858. Ext 
|3 9.101360. ¢ 6,48/360. 


224 APPENDIX. 





“> The foregoing extracts have been made to shew the entire 
agreement between the astronomy of the Tetrabiblos and that 
of the Almagest. The Tables herein given from the latter 
work, are, of course, now superseded by others of modern 
‘calculation, infinitely more complete. 





Wo, THE. 


The Centiloquy, or Hundred Aphorisms of Claudius 
Piolemy* ; otherwise called, the Fruit of 
his Four Books. 

I, JupGmMENT must be regulated by thyself, as well as ‘by 
the science ; for it 1s not possible that particular forms of 
events should be declared by any person, however scientific ; 
since the understanding conceives only a certain general idea 
of some sensibfe event, and not its particular form. It is, 
therefore, necessary for him who practises herein to adopt 
inference. They only: who are inspired by the deity can pre- 
dict particulars. 

II. When an enquirer shall make mature search into an 
expected event, there will be found no material difference 
between the event itself and his idea of it. 

III. Whosoever may be adapted to any particular event 


# Moxon’s Mathematical Dictionary says, that the “Centiloquium — 
“ is a book containing one hundred astrological aphorisms, common- 
“ly ascribed to Ptolemy, as its author, but by some to Hermes Tris- 
‘““ megistus.” This account, however, seems to be inaccurate ; for 
the CentiJoquy attributed to Osiris’s cotemporary and counsellor 
(eulogized by Lilly as having been “one of the-wisest of all mortal. 


~ men, and as ancient as Moyses”), is very different from that known 


by. the name of the Kagwoc, or “ Fruit of the Tetrabiblos.” Whether 
this latter Centiloquy be really the work of Ptolemy is another ques- 
tion: it has been usually edited as his, but some of the aphorisms 
seem to relate to horary questions only, which are not adverted to in 


‘the Tetrabiblos, and there are others also which do not appear to 
result from the doctrine of that book. 


APPENDIX. | 225 
or pursuit, will assuredly have the star indicative thereof 
very potent.in his nativity. 

IV. Amind apt in knowledge will svcoes truth more 
readily than one practised in the highest branches of science. 

V. A skilful person, acquainted with the nature of the 
stars, is enabled to avert many of their effects, and to prepare 
himself for those effects before they arrive. 

VI.. It is advantageous to make choice of days and hours 
at a time well constituted by the nativity. Should the time 
be adverse, the choice will in no respect avail, however fa- 
vourable an issue it may chance to promise. 

VII. The mingled influences of the stars can be under- 
stood by no one who has not previously acquired knowledge 
of the combinations and. varieties existing in. nature. | 

VIII. A sagacious mind improves the operation of the 
heavens, as a skilful farmer, by cultivation, i ea a na- 
ture. 

IX. In their generation and corruption forms are influ- 
enced iby the celestial forms, of which the framers of talis- 
mans consequently avail themselves, by observing the in- | 
gresses of the stars thereupon. 

X. In the election of days and hours, make use of the 
malefics, to the same moderate extent as the skilful physt- 
cian would use poisons in ofder to perform cures. 

XI. A day and hour are not to be elected until the qua« 
lity of the object proposed shall be known. 

XII. Love and hatred prohibit the’ true accomplishment 
of.judgments ; and, inasmuch as they lessen the most im- 
portant, so likewise they magnify the most trivial things. . 

XIII. In every indication made by the constitution of the 
heavens, secondary stars, whether auxiliary or meus 
thereto, are also to be used. 

XIV. The astrologer will be entangled in a labyrinth of . 
error, when the seventh house and its lord shall be afflicted. 

-+ XV. Signs cadent from the ascendant of any kingdom 
GG 


226  * APPENDIX.: 

are the ascendants of that kingdom’s: enemies. But the 
angles and succedent houses are the ascendants of its friends. 
It is the same in all doctrines and institutions. _ 

_-XVI. When the benefics may be controuled in the eighth 
house, they bring. mischief by means of good men :. if, on 
the other hand, they he well. affected, they will a mis- 
chief. 
XVII. .Give no eacsicn as to the future life ne an aged 


¢. 


person, until the number. of yer he may. live shall have . 


been reckoned. 

XVIII. If, while a benefic may ascend, both. the lumi- 
naries should be in the same minute*, the native will be 
equaily. and’ highly, prosperous in all things which can befal 
him. So, likewise, if the luminaries be mutually opposed 
by the east and west... But the contrary effect.will: be pro- 
duced, should a.malefic be on the ascendant. - 

XIX. The efficacy of purgation is a aa the Moon’s 
. Conjunction with Jupiter. 

XX. Pierce not with iron that part of the body which 
May be governed by the sign actually occupied by the Moon. 

XXI. When the Moon may be in. Scorpio or Pisces, pur- 
gation may be advantageously used, provided the lord of the 
ascendant be coupled with some star posited below the 
earth. If he be coupled with a star placed above the earth, 
* the potion swallowed will be vomited up. 

XXII. Neither put on nor lay aside any garment for the 
first time, when the Moon may be located in Leo. And ‘it 
will be still. worse to do so; should she be badly affected. 

XXIII. Aspects between the Moon and stars give the 
native much activity ; and, if the stars be in. power, they 
-andicate an efficient, but if. weak an mens excitation to ac- 
tion. 





 * Of the same degree and sign. 


APPENDIX. 227 


XXIV. An eclipse of the luminaries, if in the angles of 
the nativity, or of an annual revolution, is noxious ; and the 
effects take place according to the space between the as- 
cendant and the place of eclipse. And as, in asolareclipse, “ 
a year is reckoned for an hour, so likewise, in a lunar fue 


.4 month is reckoned for an hour. 


XXV. The progression of a significator, posited in the 
mid- heaven, i is to be made by ‘right ascension ; of another 


- posited in the ascendant, by the oblique ascension of the 


\ 


particular latitude. 

XXVI. There is obvious concealment-in the case, if the- 
star significative of any particular affair be in conjunction. 
with the Sun, either under the earth of in a place foreign 
to.its own nature. On the ‘other hand, there is’ manifesta- 
tion, should the star be raised ‘to elevation out of its depres- 


-sion, and be, located in its own place. 


XXVII. ‘Venus gives pleasure to the native in that part 
of the body which may be ruled by the sign she o¢cupies. It . 


is the same with other stars. 
XXVIII. When the Moon may not hold a familiarity 


with two planets, as is desirable, care- should be taken to con- 


nect her, if possible, with some fixed. star. combining their 
qualities, 

XXIX. The fixed stars grant sicenaly good fortune, un- 
connected with the understanding; but it is most com- 
monly marked by calamities, unless the planets also agree 
in the felicity. 

_ XXX. Obierve the creation of the first king of any dy- 
nasty; for if the ascendant at that creation should agree with 
the ascendant of the nativity of the king’s son, he will 
succeed his father. 

. XXXI. When the star ruling over any kingdom shall 
enter into a climacterical place, either the king, or some one 
of the chief men-of his kingdom, will die. 

XXXII. Concord: between two persons is. produced by 





we 


Pane ar _——— gre ee re ~ - 7 se eee 
poet Seeley — He 3 = = — shar : er 8 Pacts _* — too ms = = pas 


228 APPENDIX. 


an harmonious figuration of the .stars, indicative of the 
matter whereby good will is constituted, in the -nativity sg 
either person. 

XXXII. Loveand hatred are discernible, as:well from 
the concord and discord of the luminaries, .as from the 
ascendants of both nativities : but one signs increase 
good will. 

XXXIV. If the lord of the place of the new Moon be in 
an angle, he is indicative of the events liable to happen in 
that month. . 

XXXV. When the Sun arrives at the place se any star, 
he excites the influence of that'.star in the atmosphere. 

XXXVI. In the foundation of cities, consider the fixed 
stars which: may seem to contribute thereto ;. but in the 
erection of houses, observe the planets. The. kings of every 
city which has Mars in culmination will most commonly 
perish by the sword. 

XXXVII. If Virgo or Pisces be on the aecendaat, the 
native will create his own dignity ; but if Aries of Libra be 


on the ascendant, he will cause his own death.. The other 


signs are to be contemplated inthe same way. 

XXXVIIT. Mercury, if- established in eithet house of 
Saturn, and in power, gives the native a speculative and in- 
quisitive intellect : if in a house of Mars, and on if in 
Aries, he gives eloquence. . 

XXXIX. Affliction of the eleventh house, in the creation 
of a king, indicates damage in his household ‘and his ttea- 
‘sury: affliction of the second house denotes the detriment 
of his subjects’ wealth. 

XL. When the ascenddnt is oppressed by the malefics, 
the native will delight in sordid things, and approve ill- 


flavoured odours. 


XLI. Beware the affliction of the eighth house ahd its 


| lord, at a time of departure; and that of the second house 


“and its lord, at a time of retufn. 


APPENDIX. 229 


XLIT. Should a disease begin when the Moon may be 
in a sign occupied at the birth by some malefic, or in quar- 
tile or opposition to any such sign, such disease will be 
most severe; and if the malefic also behold the said sign,. © 
it will be dangerous. On the other hand, there will be no 
danger if the Moon be in a place held at the time of birth 
by some benefic. 

_ XLIIT. The malefic figures of a nation are ‘strengthened 
by adverse figurations of existing times. 

XLIV. It is an evil case if the ascendant of a sick per- 
son resist the figuration of his own nativity; and if the time 
should not bring up any benefic. | 

XLV. If the ascendant, or principal significators, be not 
in human signs, the native himself will be also estranged 
from human nature. 

XLVI. In nativities much happiness is conferred by the 
fixed stars; and also by the angles of the new Moon, and 
by the places of a kingdom’ s Part of Fortune, should the 
ascendant be found in any of them. 

XLVII. If a malefic in one nativity fall on the place of a 
benefic in another nativity, he who has the benefic will suffer 
damage from him who has the malefic. 

ALVIII. If the mid-heaven of a prince be the ascendant 
of his subject, or if their respective significators be con- 
figurated in a benevolent form, they will continue long in- 

, separable, It will be the same, also, should the sixth house 
of a subject or servant be the ascendant of his prince or 
master. | 

XLIX. If the ascendant of a servant be the mid-heaven 
in his master’s nativity, the master will place so much con- 
fidence in that servant as to be ruled by him. 

@ LL. Overlook none of the hundred and nineteen conjunc 
tions ; for on them depends the knowledge of worldly ope- 
rations, whether of generation or of corruption. 

LI. Make the sign occupied by the Moon at the time of 


7 ee - —s Eee mage eye om? 
e 
. 





230 APPENDIX. 


birth the sign ascending .at the conception; and consider 
that in which she may be posited at the conception, or the 
opposite one, as the sign ascending at the birth. : 
LIT. Men of tall stature have their-lords of nativity in 
elevation, and their ascendants in the beginnings of signs ; 
but the lords.of men of short stature will be found in decli-. 
nation*, It must also be seen whether the signs be ee or 


_ oblique. 


LIT. The lords of nativity of slight or thin men have 
no latitude, but those of stout.or fat men have ; and, if the 
latitude be south, the native will be active ; if north, i in- 
active. | 

LIV. In the construction of a ‘building, the principal 
rulers, if coupled. with a star below the earth, -will impede 
the erection. 

LV. Mars’s evil influence over ships i is diminished if he 
be neither in the mid-heaven nor in the eleventh house ; © 
but if in either of those places, he renders the ship liable to 
be captured hy pirates. . And if the ascendant be afflicted by 


_any fixed star of the nature of Mars, the ship willbe burned. 


LVI. While the Moon is in her first quarter, withdrawing — 


- from her conjunction with ‘the Sun, the bodily humours 
expand until her second: quench: in her other quarters they 


decrease. | 
LVII. If, during a sickness, the seventh house and its’ 
lord be afflicted, change the physician. j 
LVIIT. Observe the place of an aspect, and its ; distance 
from the ascéndant of the year 5 for the event will happen 


_ when the profection may arrive thither. 


LIX. Before pronouncing that. an absent person ‘shall die, 


observe whether he may not become intoxicated ; before de- 


claring that he:shall receive 4 wound, see aliether he may not 





* Or in obscure situations. 





2 


APPENDIX. 231 


be let blood; and before saying that he shall find treasure, 
examine whether he may not receive his own deposit; for 
the figures of all these things may be similar. 

. LX. In cases of sickness, observe the critical days, and 
the Moon’s progress in the angles of a figure of sixteen 
sides. If those angles be well affected, it is favourable for 
. the invalid ; if they be afflicted, unfavourable. 

LXI. The Moon is significative of bodily meres which, 
in respect of motion, resemble her. 

LXII. By marking exactly the beginning of a conjunc- 
tion*, judgment may be made of the variation of the wea- 
ther in the ensuing month. It will depend upon the lord 
of the angle of every figure, for he controuls the nature of 
the atmosphere ; assuming also at these times the quality of 
the existing weather. 

LXIII. In the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, pro- 
nounce according to the nature of that one which may be 
higher in elevation. Follow the same rule with other stars. 

. LXIV. After ascertaining the lord of the enquiry, see | 
what power he may have in the annual revolution, or in the 
ascendant of the new Moon; and pronounce accordihgly. - 

- LXV. In the least conjunction, the difference of the 
mean conjunction, and in the mean Sonjanchen the dif- 
ference of the greatest conjunctiont. : 

LXVI. Consider no profection by itself alone, but make 
reference also to the qualifications and impediments -of the 
Stars. 

LXVII. Years are diminished by the imbecility of the 
receiver. 

LXVIIJ..A malefic, when iaatutine, signifies an acci- 
dent; when vespertine, a disease. 





* Of the Sun and Moon. 
+ On this aphorism Partridge has said, “ how Ptolemy meant it to 
“‘be understood, I know not; and so I leave it.” 


- 


232 APPEND, .. 
LXIX, The native’s sight will baimpaired if the Moon 
be opposed to the Sun, ani joined with nebulous stars ; and 
if the Moon be in the western angle, and both the malefic 


stars in the eastern angle, the Sun being in an angle also, | 


the native will become blind. 


LXX. Insanity is produced if ‘the Maon have no con- 


nection with Mercury ;—and, if neither of them he connected 
with the ascendant, Saturn being in occupation of that 
angle by night, but Mars by day, especially if in Cancer, 
Virgo, or Pisces, a deemoniag affection will be produced. 

LXXI. If both luminaries: may be in masculine signs, in 
the nativities of males, their actions will be consonant with 
nature; but if so placed in the nativities of females, they 
increase their-action. And Mars and Venus, if matutine, 
incline to the masculine gender ; if vespertine, to the femi- 
nine. 

- LXXII. Matters of education are to be considered by the 
ascending lords of triplicity; matters of life, by the lords 
of the conditionary Juminary’s triplicity. 

. LXXIII. If the Sun be found with the Gorgon’ s head 
(Caput Medusa), and not aspected by any benefic star, and 
if there be no benefic present in the eighth house, and the 
lord. of the conditionary luminary be opposed to Mars, or in 
quartile ta him, the natiye will be beheaded. If the lumi- 
~ nary culminate, his body will be maimed or mangled ; and 
if the aspect in quartile be from Gemini or Pisces, his 
hands and feet will be amputated. 

LXXIV. Mars, if ascending, aia gives a scar in 
the face. 

LXXV. If the Sun be in sonjanction with the lord of 
the ascendant, in Leo, and Mars have no prerogative in the 
ascendant, and if there be no benefic in the eighth house, 
the native will be burned. 

_ LXXVI. If Saturn hold the mid-heayen, and the con- 
ditionary luminary be opposed to him, the native will perish 





APPENDIX. 233 


. im the ruins of buildings, provided the sign on the lower 
heaven be an earthly sign ; if it be a watery sign, he will be 
drowned or suffocated by water: if a human sign, he will be 
strangled by men, or will perish by the halter or the scourge. 
Should there, however, be a benefic in the eighth house, he 
will not suffer death, although he will be’brought near it. 

LXXVII. Profection of the ascendant is to be made for 
matters affecting the body ; of the Part of Fortune, for ex- 
trinsic circumstances ; of the Moon, for the connection be- 
tween the body and the spirit; and of the mid-heaven, for 
the employment or profession. 

LXXVIII. A star often dispenses influence in a place in 
which it has no prerogative, thus bringing unexpected advan- 
tage to the native. 


LX XIX. Whoever has Mars in the eleventh house, does | 


not govern his master. 

LXXX. If Venus be in conjunction with Saturn, and 
have any lord of house in the seventh house, the native will 
be of spurious origin. 

LXXXI. Times are reckoned in seven ways ; viz. by the 
space between two significators ; by the space between their 
mutual aspects; by the approach of one to the other; by 
the space between either of them and the place appropriated 
to the proposed event ; by the descension of a star, with its 
addition or diminution ; by the changing of a significator ; 
and by the approach ofa planet to its place. | 
’ LXXXII. When a figure may be equipoised, observe the 
horoscope (or figure) at the new or full moon, and, if that 
also be equipoised, be not hasty in giving judgement. 

LXXXIII. The time of obtaining a grant indicates the 
affection between the applicant and his prince ; but the seat* 
shews the nature of the office ;— 


CN EE aaa 


* Or part of heaven indicating the grant. 
HH 


eee ee ee 


PR re aa i ecione ce 
ee, El SR dat a Me ee Se - meine cog aks me cme 





— O84 APPENDIX; 


LXXXIV. And if Mars be lord of the ascendant at the 
time of entering on possession, aud posited in the second 
house, or coupled with the.lord of the second, he pimge 
much mischief. . 

LXXXV. Should the lord of the ascendant be configu: 
rated with the lord of the second house, the prince will 
spontaneously create many Charges. 

LX:XXVI. The Sun is the source of the vital power; the 
Moon, of the natural power. 

LXXXVII. Monthly. revolutions are made in twenty- 
eight days, two hours and about eighteen mmutes. Judge- 
ment is also made by. some persons by means of the Sun’s 
progress; that is to say, by his partile equations to that de- 
gree and minute which he might hold at the beginning. 

LXXXVIII. In making profection of the part of For- 

- tune for a whole annual revolution, a space equal.to that — 
between the Sun and Moon is to be reckoned ee the 
ascendant. 

LXXXIX. Consider the grandfather’ s affairs from the 
seventh house, and the uncle’s from the sixth. 

XC. Should the significator be in aspect to the ascend- 
ant, the hidden event or object will correspond in its nature 
with the ascendant ; but if the ascendant be not so aspected, 
the nature of the event will accord with that of the place 
in which the significator is posited. The lord of the hour - 

7 shews its colour; the place of the Moon its time; and, if 

“above the earth, it will be a novel thing; if below, old. 
The part of Fortune indicates its quantity, whether long or 
short, The lords of the terms, and of the lower heaven and 
mid-heaven, and of the Moon, shew its substance or value. 

XCI. Should the ruler of a sick persof: be combust, it is 
an evjl portent ; and especially if the part of Fortune be 
afflicted. 

XCII. Saturn, if oriental, is not so highly noxious to a 
sick person ; nor Mars, if. occidental. 





__ gee 





APPENDIX. 235 


XCIII. Judgement is not to be drawn from any figure 
until the next conjunction shall have been considered : for 
principles are varied by every conjunction ; and therefore, to 
avoid error, both the last and the next should be combined. 

XCIV. The place of the more potent significator indi- 
cates the thoughts of the inquirer. 

XCV. The stars rising with the tenth’ house prove how 
far the native may be fitted to the occupation which he fol- 
lows. 

XCVI. In an eclipse, such significations as are ante 
nearest the angles, shew the events decreed. The nature of 
the stars in accordance with the eclipse, planets as well.as 
fixed stars, and also the appearances co-ascending, are like- 
wise to be considered, and judgement is to be given accord- 
ingly. . 

XCVII. The event inquired about will be speedily accom- 
plished, should the lord of the new or full Moon be in an 
angle. 

XCVIII. Shooting stars, and meteors like flowing hair, 
bear a secondary part in judgements. 

XCIX. Shooting stars denote the dryness of the air; and, 
if they are projected to one part only, they indicate wind 
therefrom: if to various parts, they indicate diminution of 
waters, a turbulent atmosphere, and incursions of armies. 

C. If comets, whose distance is eleven signs behind the 
Sun, appear in angles, the king of some kingdom, or one 
of the princes or chief men of a kingdom, will die. If 
in a succedent house, the affairs of the kingdom’s treasury 
will prosper, but the governor or ruler will be changed. If 
in a cadent house, there will be diseases and sudden deaths. 
And if comets be in motion from the west towards the east, a 
foreign foe will invade the country: if not in motion, the 
foe will be provincial, or domestic. 


END OF THE CENTILOQUY. 


- —_s -_— ee ee ee 


236. . APPENDIX. 


No, FV. 
The Zodiacal Planisphere. 


~Tue Reader is desired to refer to the annexed Plate, con- 
taining diagrams, of the Zodiacal Planispbere, which has been 
spoken of in the Note in p. 146. 


Fic. 1 is the Planisphere adjusted for the northern lati- 
tude of 30° 22’ (where the longest day consists of fourteen 
equatorial hours), agreeably to the ‘* Exemplification’’ given 
by Ptolemy in Chap. 15, Book 3. It represents that portion 
of the ccelestiak sphere which is contained between the tropics: — 
the central horizontal line is the equator; the curved line 
extending longitudinally from east to west 1s the ecliptic ; 
the central perpendicular line is the meridian, or cusp of the 
10th house ; the other short lines, cutting the equator trans- 
versely, are the cusps of the other houses ; that of the first 
house being the eastern horizon ; that of the 7th, the west- 
ern horizon. Hence, the distance from the Ist house to 
the meridian, or from the meridian to, the 7th house, shews 
the semi-diurnal arc of any parallel of declination in the 
ecliptic; and the distance of the 7th house to the 4th, or 
from the 4th to the Ist, shews the semi-nocturnal arc. The 
distance from the cusp of one house to that of the next, 
taken on the same parallel, is also equal to two temporal . 
hours ; thus, for instance, in the latitude above quoted, the. 
semi-diurnal arc of 0° o is 6h. 50m., or 102° 39’ of the 
equator ; consequently the diurnal temporal hour is equal — 
to one equatorial ‘hour and eight minutes, or to 17° 6’ of 
the equator. 

In his first example, Ptolemy directs 0° Y to be placed 
on the ascendant, so that the beginning of ¥F may be on 
the mid-heaven : 0° = must, therefore, fall on the point A, 
distant from the mid-heaven 147° 44’ of the equator, as ~ 


APPENDIX. 237 


measured by the line AB; because every point in the sphere 

always preserves one and the same parallel with the equator; 

and OP uw, in passing to the mid-heaven,/must proceed 

along the line AB. In the present case, however, it is re- 

quired to'know how long 0° 1 will be in coming to the 
ascendant, the given position of 0° y.. Now 0° o will beon 

the ascendant when it arrives at the point C ; therefore the 

distance ftom A to C is the amount of the prorogation be- 

tweem 0° ¢ (when posited on the ascendant) and 0 n, 
and it is equal to 45°5' of the equator. In the second . 
example, 0° ¥ is placed on the mid-heaven, which position . 
must be at D, so that 0° mo must necessarily be at E; and 
the distance from E to B, equal to 57° 44’ of. the equator, is 
the prorogation between 0° ¥ and 0° m1, when 0° » is on 
the mid-heaven. In the third example, 0° » is supposed 
' to be on the 7th house, or descending, at F, so that 2 is on 
the mid-heavyen, and 0° m at the point G, in advance of 
the mid-heaven 32° 16’ of the equator, as shewn by the — 
distance BG. Now it is required to bring 0° m to the 7th 
house (the place of 0° w), and it will be there on arriving 
at H, distant from B 102° 39’ of the equator; but as 0° n 
is already at G, the distance from G to H, equal to 70° 23’ 
of the equator, is the amount of the prorogation between 
0° y and 0° m, when 0° y is on the 7th house, The 
fourth example places 0° v at I, three temporal hours past 
the meridian ; 0° x therefore falls on the point K, at the 
distance of 13 equatorial degrees before the meridian or mid- 
heaven, and will be three temporal hours past the meridian 
(the position of 0? w) on arriving at L, distant 51 equatorial 
degrees from the mid-heaven : the whole distanee from K 
(the first position of @° m)to L, its second position, equal 
to 64 degrees of the equator, is therefore the prorogation 
between 0° y and 0° 1, when 0° ¥ is past the meridian at 
the distance of three temporal hours.—Ptolemy has also 
instanced two other positions for 0° ¥ ; viz. at two tem- 


238 APPENDIX. 


poral hours. past the meridian, ahd at two temporal hours 
before the occidental angle; or, in other: words, on the cusp 
of the 9th howMe, and on that of the 8th. Now, if 0° ¥ -be 
on the cusp of the 9th house, it must be at M, and 0° a will 
be at N, distant 62 equatorial degrees from Q, which is also 
on the cusp of the 9th. If 0° ¥ be on the cusp of the 8th, 
it must be at OQ, and 0° m will be at P, distant 66 equatorial 
degrees from R, which is also on the cusp of the 8th: these 


_ two several numbers of degrees will be the respective proroga- 


tions between 0°. and 0° 11, when 0° ¥ is placed on the 
9th and 8th houses. 

.Ptolemy’s ‘* Exemplification”’ has been followed thus mi- 
nutelyin order to shew how perfectly Mr. Ranger’s invention is 
adapted to assist (if not to supersede) arithmetical calculation; 
for, after the Planisphere has once been.accurately laid down, 
a line drawn. parallel to the equator, from the significator to 
the promittor,. or to the promittor’s pole of position, and 
measured by degrees of the equator, will accomplish the 
whole operation of ascertaining the amount of prorogation. 


Fic. 2 is the Equator extended, in plano, on a scale pro- 
portionate to the planispheres in Figs. 1 and 3; it 1s divided 
into 360 degrees, and into equal time, as measured by the | 
24 hours of the earth’s daily rotation on its agis, and by 
sinaller portions of four minutes each, corresponding with 


‘degrees of the equator. 


Fic. 3 is the Planisphere set for the latitude of Southern 
Britain, 51° 30’ N., where the longest day is 16h. 30 m., the 
semi-diurnal arc of 0° m being consequently 7 h. 52 m., or 
118° of the equator, and its diurnal temporal hour equal to 
one hour and nearly nineteen minutes of equatorial time, or - 
to 19° 40’ of the equator. | 

In applying Ptolemy’s examples, given in Chap. 15, 
Book 3, to this latitude, it will follow that, when 0° y may 


APPENDIX. - 239. 


be on the ascendant, 0° 1 will be at A, and will subsequent- 


ly arrive at the ascendant at C, after the passage of 29° 43’ 


ef the equator. When 0° ¥ may be on the mid-heaven ‘at 
D, 0° o will be at E, and will arrive at B, on the mid- 
heaven, after the passage of 57° 44’ of the equator, as in 
Fig. 1. “When 0° ¥ may be on the 7th house, at F, 0° a 
will be at G, and will come to the 7th house, at H, after 
the passage of 85° 45’ of the equator. If 0° y& be three 
temporal hours past the meridian, at I, O° m would be at K, 
again 13 equatorial degrees before the meridian, as in Fie. 1, 
and will be three temporal hours past the meridian, a posi- 
tion similar to that assumed for 0° ¥, on arriving at L, 
distant from the mid-heaven 59 equatorial degrees; thus 
making the whole distance, from K to L, #2 equatorial de- 
grees.—If 0° y be on the 9th house, at M, 0° a will be at 
- N, distant from Q (also on the 9th house) about 67 equa- 


torial degrees. If 0° op be on the 8th house, at O, 0° m 


will be at P, distant from R (also on the 8th house) about 
76 equatorial degrees. 

By taking the trouble to calculate the distances between 
the several positions given by Ptolemy, the Reader may sa- 
tisfy himself of the sufficiency of this Planisphere for the 
purpose for which it was first projected ; viz. for the more 
expeditious’ measurement of the arcs of direction. The 
Tables of Ascensions, extracted from the Almagest, in p, 223, 
will shew that the arcs, as measured in Figs. 1 and 2 of the 
plate, exactly tally with the amounts of distance obtained by 
calculating arithmetically, according to the respective lati- 
tudes, as quoted in the Tables. 





The slight view which has been here given of the Zodiacal 
Planisphere invented by Mr. Ranger, must not be considered 
as pretending to offer a complete idea of its powers: they 
are so manifold and various, that another volume would be 


RE SOR a: de OS Or ees | eee 


240 | APPENDIX. 


required to detail them fully ; ‘and it has now been used 
only in order to give a better illustration of Ptolemy’s ex- 
amples of the spaces of prorogation than mere words can 
do. To persons conversant with the mathematical part of 
astronomy, the facility with which a complete representation 
of zodiacal latitude, declination, the poles of position, cre- 
pusculine circles, and other phenomena, may be made by 
this Planisphere, will be sufficiently obyious from the accom- 
panying Figures. 


FINIS. 


a a a a ad 
Davis and Dickson, Printers, St. Martin’s-le-Grand, Londou. 


